 75X186 School Name: P186X WALTER J. DAMROSCH SCHOOL Principal: AVA CARA KAPLAN   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information P186X, Damrosch Day Treatment School 307500012186 K-12 750 Jennings Street, Bronx, NY 10459 School Number (DBN): 75X186 718-378-0006 Phone Number: 718-589-9544 Fax: Sarah Templeman stempleman@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: AvaC.Kaplan MahaHusein Precious Davis Yelena Vassilyeva N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information Ketler Louissaint Superintendent: 400 1 st Avenue, NY, NY 10010 klouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1503 Phone Number: 212-802-1678 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   Bronx Field Support Center FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10462 JRuiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: Phone Number: 718-828-7776 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Ava C. Kaplan MahaHusein Precious Davis GehanElhassan Monica Dixon Kathleen Delgado *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) DeniciaSutton YelenaVassilyeva Shirley Vargas Troy Gorodess Member/Parent Member/P186X Member/P186X Member/P186X Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission is to transition students into a Least Restrictive Environment (LRE) by providing them with direct explicit instruction. Our vision is to improve independence, communication skills, and problem solving through the use of Specially Designed Instruction.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P186X is a District 75/Citywide Special Education school located in Morrisania in the Bronx with 673 students from grade K through grade 12. The school population comprises 39% Black, 54% Hispanic, 23% White, 11% Asian and 8% other students. (ATS Report September 4, 2018). The student body includes 33% English Language Learners. Boys account for 70% of the students enrolled and girls account for 30%. As of September 4, 2018 the total student population can be categorized as having the following disabilities: 38% Emotional Disturbance, 19% Intellectual Disabilities, 18% Multiple Disabilities, 12% Autism, 13% other disabilities and 6% unknown. P186X partners with the following organizations: Cary Leeds Tennis Center, New York University, New York Police Department, Learning Partners Program (LPP), PACE University, District 75 coaches, Cook Shop, New York City Teaching Fellows (NYCTF), Urban Arts Partnership, Genius Plaza, GREAT(Division of English Language Learners and Student Support), The Children's Museum of the Arts, and The Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education. P186X continues to implement the following initiatives: Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI), College Access for All, The Family English initiative (The Department of Education Division of Family and Community Engagement) and College Access for English Language Learners. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. P186X is a K-12 Special Education School which includes students with Autism, Multiple Disabilities, Emotional Disturbance, Intellectual Disability, and Other Heath Impairments. Our students need remediation in the following areas: communication, problem solving, self regulation, mobility, reading, and writing. These needs impede their ability to independently access the common core curriculum in comparison to the general education peers. P186X has a modified math block schedule in the Alternate Assessment classes at the main site and our P186X@306 annex. The block allows for an additional math period where students are grouped homogeneously based on their mathematics assessment data from our Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory(SANDI) assessment. Due to the improvement on our mathematics test scores, we are continuing this modified math block. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Progress Made on Framework for Great Schools: Collaborations: P186X had a standards based inquiry team (strategic teaching) which focused on gaps and analyzing next steps related to necessary skills needed for the New York State Exams. Instruction was customized, inclusive, and aligned to the Common Core. There was an emphasis on teacher collaboration and common planning throughout the 2017-2018 school year. During extended Mondays, grade band teams collaborated in unit planning, creating assessments, and analyzing student work. Area of Focus: Teachers need to provide rigorous instruction to insure that all students learn to the best of their ability. We are bringing five more lead teachers to the organization to improve instructional practices. All middle school standardized assessment program will be entrenched with Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) supports to improve pedagogical practices and strategies that are implemented, including: a strategic reading period, Word Generation, and honing in on Tier I instructional practices. The strategic reading period will offer targeted interventions and/or enrichment Tier II instruction through programs such as: Wilson Reading Systems, Book Clubs, Words and Verbs, Debate and Raz-Kids. 0  1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X186 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09,10,11,12,SE Total Enrollment (2017-18) 645 SIG Recipient (Y/N) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language YES Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 3 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Drama # Music # Dance # CTE N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.4% % Reduced Lunch 28.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 52.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 3.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2% 15% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 3 0.0% 0.3% 99.5% 40.5% 1.9% 1.6% 8 15% 8.8 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data shows academic student growth in the day to day performance of our students. Recent data from EdPerformance (June 21, 2018) details modest gains in both ELA and Mathematics when comparing Beginning and End of Year results. For the most recent administration in Mathematics, Edperformance data shows an average gain of +104 scale score points across grade bands. For the most recent administration in ELA, Edperformance data shows an average gain of +90 scale score points across grade bands. Recent MOSL assessment data from Fountas and Pinnell (ELA) and the Mathematics Performance Tasks show additional gains in ELA and Mathematics. On average students across grade bands improved by two independent reading levels as measured by The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. This progress was in alignment with the Principal's goal. Results from the End of Year Mathematics Performance Tasks administered to students in K-2 clearly shows student progress towards meeting proficiency on grade level standards. P186X strength is the collaboration between teachers during the mathematical block in our Alternate Assessment Programs. P186X has been utilizing the SANDI Math Block for our alternately assessed students for the past three years. Each year we fine tune our teaching practices and approach to increase student achievement. Last year we saw tremendous growth in weekly assessments and ultimately the Formative Assessment ot Standards Tasks (FAST). Based on class averages, at our off site, there was a 5% increase across twelve classes on Level 1, a 4% increase across nine classes on Level 2 and a 5% increase across five classes on Level 3. This gave us an average of 4.7% increases in class averages across our off site. Based on class averages, at our main site, there was a 8% increase across twelve classes on Level 1 and a 1% increase across four classes on Level two. This gave us an average of 4.5% increase in class averages across our main site. The P186X Alternate Assessment Program, as a whole, has made significant increases across site and levels. We will continue to implement the math block as it continues to show academic growth amongst our students. 3  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will become mathematicians by increasing their proficiency as a result of implementing a math block so teachers can focus on mathematics with homogeneous groupings as measured by at least a 10% increase in students scoring a Performance Level 2 on the New York State Mathematics Exams and at least a 6 % increase in Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) Operations and Algebra class average. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Principal, Assistant Principals, Coordinators of Instruction and Curriculum Support, Data Specialist, English as a New Language (ENL) Liaison, and Unit Coordinators will schedule homogeneous groups for Mathematics in addition to the regularly scheduled Mathematics period where Common Core aligned curriculum and supports are implemented. Students that are alternately assessed are grouped, levels 1-3, based on their current SANDI assessment data. Standardized Assessment students will be placed in homogeneous groups within the classroom for the second half of the math block period for specialized intervention and enrichment services. Teachers will teach using an Inquiry Based educational approach for learning that incorporates Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics (STEAM) as access points for guiding student inquiry, dialogue, and critical thinking. They will also implement the Equals math curriculum in Alternate Assessment classes. The Common Core Curricula Engage NY will be used in conjunction with supplemental programs (Math Triumphs, Achieve It, Math Steps, etc.) for small groups during the block periods to address individual students needs based on the Performance Task assessment for Standardized Assessment classes. Teachers will be trained in the supplemental programs during weekly Professional Learning Training Days. A minimum of 5 Professional Learning trainings will focus on Mathematical implementation and instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators, Lead Teachers, Unit Coordinators, Data Specialist, and English as a New Language (ENL) Liaison Standardized Assessment Students scoring a 1.75-2.25 Proficiency Ratings in Math and Alternate Assessment Students scoring a Level 1 in Math September 2018 - November 2018 December 2018 - February 2019 5  Teachers will assess Standardized Assessment students with Performance Tasks and Alternate Assessment students with SANDI/FAST benchmark assessments to determine current progress and adjust instructional strategies and determine appropriate supplemental programs accordingly. During Monday’s Extended Day/Professional Training Days, teachers will collaborate to align supplemental programs to the curriculum. Teachers will assess students to determine areas of greatest need to help move their groups of students to access the Common Core Learning Standards and the curriculum. Administrators and lead teachers will conduct instructional walk-throughs to provide support to teachers and to ensure block periods are being implemented efficiently. Weekly meetings, based on a rotating schedule, meetings will be held with Administrators, Unit Coordinators, and lead teachers for additional information and support. March 2019-June 2019 January 2019 – February 2019 Administrator,Data Specialist and Lead Teachers. October 2018-December 2018 Administrator,Data Specialist,Curriculum Support and Lead Teachers. On going beginning in October 2018 Ongoing beginning in October 2018 Ongoing beginning in October 2018 Administrator,Data Specialist,Curriculum Support and Lead Teachers. Standardized Assessment Students scoring a 1.75-2.25 Proficiency Ratings in Math and Alternate Assessment Students scoring a Level 1 in Math Standardized Assessment Students scoring a 1.75-2.25 Proficiency Ratings in Math and Alternate Assessment Students scoring a Level 1 in Math Standardized Assessment Students scoring a 1.75-2.25 Proficiency Ratings in Math and Alternate Assessment 6  Students scoring a Level 1 in Math 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Data Specialist, Unit Coordinators, English as a New Language (ENL) Liaison and Parent Coordinator will meet with parents/guardians during Meet and Greets and Family Workshops to support the families' understanding of rigorous instruction, Social/Emotional support, and the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) in order for them to continue supporting their children/guardian at home. Families interact with Teachers, Clinicians, and Parent Coordinator during Tuesday's Family outreach to discuss their child's/guardian's progress. Families also receive an Interim Progress Update (IPU) four times a year to inform families of their child(ren)/guardian(s) academic and behavioral progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Coordination of scheduling, programs used, transition, alignment to Common Core Learning Standards and Curriculum, and lesson planning will be monitored and supported by the Lead Teacher, Data Specialist, and Assistant Principals. Mathematics block periods will be included in student schedules by Unit Coordinators. Time will be allotted to teachers, during the extended Monday trainings, to collaborate in order to align supplemental programs to curricula. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Monitoring will be completed using Performance Task Assessment in February 2019 to show a 5% increase in the total average score across all grade levels compare to base line. Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI) will be updated in February 2019 to see a 3 % increase within the Operations and Algebra section of SANDI, based on class averages for the specific items addressed in levels 1-3 for Alternate Assessment students. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 7  The instrument of measure for Standardized Assessment students will be the Mathematics Performance Task Assessment, and the instrument of measure for Alternately Assessed Students will be the Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Obtained from ATS Report RLAT shows the following: For all ELL students that have a valid score for both 2016-2017 NYSESLAT, the average gain on the reading subtest across grade bands and program ratios was 2.35 points. Further analysis reveals that for those students in a 12:1:1 Alternate Assessment ratio setting, the gain was 1.63 points. For students in grades 3-5 the average gain is 1.17 points. From these students, those whose home language is Spanish, there was an average gain across grades 3-5 on the reading subtest of 1.62 points. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, a targeted group of 12:1:1 alternately assessed English Language Learners in grades K-5, whose home language is Spanish, will increase their language proficiency as a result of teachers creating safe and supportive classroom environments using culturally responsive instruction as measured by at least a 5 point increase on the Reading subtest of NYSESLAT. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ENL teachers will provide monthly professional developments to the classroom teaching teams to ensure that students are being taught in a supportive classroom environment using culturally responsive instruction strategies such as but not limited to interviewing students and families, integrating relevant word problems and concept by using student vocabulary, bringing in guest speakers and delivering different forms of content through learning stations. Teachers will use media that positively depict a range of cultures. The Learning Partners Program team will meet and create a calendar of events to ensure that student data is analyzed and data driven instruction is applied in classroom. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrator, ENL Liaison, ENL Teachers and Lead Teachers. TARGETED POPULATION September 2018 12:1:1 ENL Alternate Assessment Ongoing from October 2018- Administrator, ENL Liaison, ENL Teachers and Lead Teachers. June 2019 ENL teachers and classroom teachers will collaborate utilizing a weekly strategic teaching format to improve students' language proficiency in reading. TARGETED POPULATION 12:1:1 ENL Alternate Assessment Weekly Strategic Teaching Format Monday: Give pre-assessment question to gauge students understanding of the standard Reading for Information (R.I.) Tuesday - Thursday: During AIS teachers use the next three questions for an "I do", "We do", and "You do" otherwise known as Model, Guided Practice and Independent Practice Friday: Teachers give the same pre-assessment question that was provided on Monday as a post-assessment 0  Teachers will be provided with the support of model and peer teachers to successfully implement the principles of culturally responsive teaching and data driven instruction in their every day work. Ongoing from September 2018-June 2019 Administrator, ENL Liaison, ENL Teachers and Lead Teachers. TARGETED POPULATION 12:1:1 ENL Alternate Assessment The reading subtest scores from NYSESLAT 2018 will be compared with reading subtest scores from NYSESLAT 2019 TARGETED POPULATION 12:1:1 ENL Alternate Assessment September 2018 and September 2019 Administrator, ENL Liaison, ENL Teachers and Lead Teachers. 1  2  3  4  5  6  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Family engagement will be implemented by building solid relationships with parents and families to establish mutual understanding and respect. Parent and family interviews will be conducted to recognize, honor and promote existing knowledge and use what works for families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Time will be allotted to teachers, during the extended Monday trainings for Professional Learning opportunities and meetings. No extra budgeting resources are necessary. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In February 2019, students will demonstrate an increase in language proficiency by demonstrating a 2.5 point increase compared to their 2018 NYSESLAT score. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The Learning Partners Program team created formative assessment will be used to measure mid year progress. Teacher created formative assessments will be used to measure weekly and monthly progress. 7  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. After analyzing the 2017-2018 School Survey, we noticed that P186X scored lower than the city average in the areas of Peer Collaboration and Innovation and Collective Responsibility. While teachers held common meetings, it is a goal to increase the effectiveness of this collaboration time. Recent Middle School Standardized MOSL assessment data from Fountas and Pinnell (ELA) ( June 2018 ) show additional gains in ELA. On average students across Middle School grade bands improved by two independent reading levels as measured by The Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment System. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will improve reading skills through the interdisciplinary collaboration of teachers and focused strategic reading instruction, as evidenced by 80% of the standardized assessment students in grades 6-8 increasing at least 2 levels on the Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? P186X is participating in the Middle School Quality Initiative (MSQI) for the second year and will work closely with the MSQI Coach to create an Action Plan and assist in the implementation and training of SERP Word Generation to support students in language acquisition across ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies. The MSQI Coordinator, MSQI Coach and Literacy Team will modify the school's Literacy Vision and Action Plan. A calendar for Word Gen implementation will be created. Teachers implementing Word Gen will be trained by the MSQI Coordinator and the MSQI Coach. All Word Gen Materials will be printed and distributed. Standardized Assessment Middle School Students The Literacy and Administrative teams, along with the support of the MSQI coach, will create a Strategic Reading Period in the Standardized Assessment Middle School program, to allow for time to provide students with targeted and appropriate reading interventions and/or acceleration instruction based on their needs. Unit coordinators will schedule time for a common strategic reading period at least three times per week, when students would be departmentalized into homogeneous reading groups based on their skill based need. Baseline reading screeners will be administered to all students, followed by secondary diagnostic assessment. The Literacy Team will analyze the data in order to determine appropriate groupings for the strategic reading period. A training plan will be created by the MSQI Coordinator and Literacy team to teach/refresh those administering the Fountas and Pinnell Assessment, in how to administer and norm around the assessment. Professional Collaboration time will be set aside for teachers to analyze data and determine adjustments which need to be made in units and lessons. September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team Principal, Assistant Principals, MSQI Coordinator, Unit Coordinator, Literacy Team 0  Inter-visitations across Middle School classrooms will be set up for teachers to watch the implementation of Word Generation in classrooms that have been utilizing the program and to share best instructional practices. The MSQI Coach will provide a calendar of school inter-visitation opportunities for the MSQI Coordinator and teachers to gain insights and best practices from other mentor schools. Teachers will being using Word Gen in their classrooms everyday as a Tier I supplemental program across the core subject areas. Standardized Assessment Middle School Students Teachers will implement a given intervention and/or acceleration program to the group of students placed into their Strategic Reading Group. Teachers will meet collaboratively to create on-going formative assessments to monitor progress of students and make instructional modifications to address their individual needs. Thinking Maps Team will provide Professional Learning opportunities during extended Mondays to all staff to promote a Thinking Maps school to allow for avenues to visually see the students' thoughts and comprehension process. Teachers will engage in inquiry cycles and analyze student data and work to make instructional decisions. Teacher Teams will use ATLAS Protocol to analyze the student assessments and work to provide more effective instruction to close determined gaps. Professional Learnings will continue to November 2018 – May 2019 Standardized Assessment Middle School Students 1 MSQI Coordinator Literacy Team October 2018 MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team October 2018-December 2018 MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team, Strategic Reading Teachers October 2018 - December 2018 MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team, Thinking Maps Inquiry Team, Middle School Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team, and occur on Monday Extended days which revolve around adjusting inquiry based reading instruction. School leadership will visit Word Generation and Strategic Reading classes using the programatic checklist to support implementation and provide feedback as needed. Students will take the diagnostic and progress monitoring benchmark assessments in September, February, and June. Middle School Teachers Standardized Assessment Middle School Students September 2018, February 2019, and June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team, Middle School Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal, Assistant Principals, MSQI Coordinator, Literacy Team, Unit Coordinators, ENL Liaison and Parent Coordinator will meet with parents/guardians during Meet and Greets and Family Workshops to support the families' understanding of rigorous instruction and the Next Generation Standards in order for them to continue supporting their children/guardian at home. Families are also contacted by Teachers and Clinicians during Tuesday's Family outreach to discuss their child's/guardian's progress. Families also receive an Interim Progress Update (IPU) four times a year to inform families of their child(ren)/guardian(s) academic and behavioral progress. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. P186X receives an additional budget from MSQI for implementation, staff, and materials. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February, 2019, 80% of the Standardized Assessment Middle School students will increase by at least one level of Fountas and Pinnell assessment 2  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Fountas and Pinnell Reading Assessment, Programmatic Progress Monitoring Assessments for Strategic Reading Period Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based upon the research based Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) trainings data collected over the past 4 years, it was determined that there needs to be a common language and consistent intervention strategies implemented throughout the P186X organization in order to increase the number of students referred to less restrictive environments. P186X has three certified TCIS trainers and they train P186X staff members in TCIS every year. The TCIS language has been incorporated into the school-wide PBIS Plan. In analyzing the types of paraprofessionals in the P186X organization, we found that there were 110 students (about 1/3 of the Standardized Assessment students) with a 1:1 Crisis Management Paraprofessional. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P186X staff will participate in a Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) training to promote a more conducive learning environment as communicated by the Principal's vision for a safe school community and to foster student's behavioral growth as measured by 5% reduction in students mandated for 1:1 crisis management paraprofessionals . 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? A committee will review staff and other stakeholders to register members to Therapeutic Crisis Intervention for Schools (TCIS) cohorts. Committee will analyze data and finalize modifications to the school’s PBIS Plan. The PBIS committee will meet with students and staff to model appropriate behavior for students related to the points system. A training video of the PBIS system will be created for staff. All new and substitute staff will receive a folder containing the school-wide PBIS system and Chancellor's Regulations (for example, A-420 and 421 Regulations) prior to entering their assigned classroom. Staff not yet trained in TCIS and Current De-Escalation Team Members District 75 is offering PBIS/TCIS Trainings for: Developmental Disabilities (DD) cohorts, Post-Crisis Response Cohorts (PCR), TCIS cohorts, and Crisis Response (CR) Cohorts. Additional TCIS trainings will be offered for staff and de-escalation teams. Staff cohorts are selected from all programs and service categories throughout the P186X organization. Staff not yet trained in TCIS and Current De-Escalation Team Members Principal, and the Assistant Principals September 2018- October 2018 October2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, and Data Specialist The Principal of P186X, a Cornell University Certified TCIS trainer, will facilitate a parent(s)/guardian(s) workshop in the spring to foster a common language and behavioral interventions that will be suggested to the parents/guardians to carry over in their homes. Unit Coordinators, clinicians, and de-escalation team will oversee the use of the common TCIS strategies and language during the de-escalation of a crisis or potential crisis. Administrators and Coordinators will look for evidence of common TCIS language and strategies. Parents and Guardians January 2019 Principal September 2018 - June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Unit Coordinators, Clinicians, De-escalation Team Staff not yet trained in TCIS and Current De-Escalation Team Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Principal of P186X, a Cornell University Certified TCIS trainer, will facilitate a parent(s)/guardian(s) workshop to foster a common language and behavioral interventions that will be suggested to the parents/guardians to carry over in their homes. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. No additional resources or budget needed Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A Title III, Part A PTA Funded X In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. February 2019 showing students with a 1:1 crisis management paraprofessional will be reduced by 2.5%. The School Implementation Team will meet with administration every two months to review data and next steps. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The School Implementation Team will create data tracking for students with 1:1 crisis management paraprofessionals. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During 2017-2018 school year ENL teachers were partnering with ten private and public organizations. We received great positive feedback from students, parents and other teachers while working with community-based Urban Arts Partnership, The Morgan Library & Museum and The Children's Museum of the Arts. In general, ENL department was collaborating with ten public and private organizations in 2017-2018, six of these organizations proved to be extremely highly effective for the needs of our students and community. That is why teachers of ENL department chose to be collaborating with the following organizations during the coming 2018-2019 school year: Urban Arts Partnership, Genius Plaza, GREAT (Division of English Language Learners and Student Support), The Children's Museum of the Arts, The Family English Initiative (The Department of Education Division of Family and Community Engagement), The Immigration Law Unit of the Legal Aid Society, Citizens' Advice Bureau, The Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education. Based on our experiences from the previous years, we expect great success from working together with the organizations named above. This tremendous success is largely resultant from a partnership entered into and maintained by P186X and a community-based organization (Urban Arts Partnership). In order to capitalize on the success of this partnership and to address needs identified though Title III survey data and formal/informal interviews with ELL parent/guardians, a priority need for P186X is to maintain current and create new partnerships with community-based organizations in order to provide more and better programming to meet the following consistent need to meet the following consistently identified needs: Adult English as a New Language Classes, Naturalization and Citizenship Exam Prep, and Preparatory Classes for the Test Assessing Secondary Completion (TASC)-(formerly known as General Education Diploma or GED) as well as the Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, families of English Language Learner (ELL) students will be supported with educational, career, and legal resources, as evidenced by an increase in partnerships with community-based organizations from the current nine to fourteen community based organizations. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the dedicated Parent-Engagement time on extended Tuesdays, P186X will partner with Urban Arts Partnership, the Bronx Heritage Music Center, the Bronx River Arts Council and the Children's Museum of the Arts in order to teach parents/guardians to use the arts as a means to improve English Language Learners' reading and listening comprehension, and to build writing skills. P186X will continue to seek out, apply for, and implement programs that work with community-based organizations and vendors such as Grace Outreach, the Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education, the Family English Initiative and The Legal Aid Society. The ENL/Bilingual Liaison will plan activities and partnerships to ensure implementation of the above. During the Title III After-School program, parents/guardians will be invited to participate in English as a New Language (ENL), Technology, Citizenship, and TASC trainings provided by P186X ENL/Bilingual Staff and the various community-based organization and vendors listed below: The Family English Initiative will provide Adult ESOL classes for the parents of ELLs and to build a Family Literacy Program Grades K-2. The Immigration Law Unit of the Legal Aid Society will partner with P186X ENL/Bilingual Teachers to provide preparation classes for the United State Citizenship Exam Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Ongoing beginning in September 2018 through June 2019 Administrator, ENL Liaison, Parent Coordinator, PA Board, ENL/Bilingual Teachers, and Community-based Organizations. Community- based organizations Parent(s) /Guardian(s) and Families of English Language Learners Community- based organizations Parent(s) /Guardian(s) and Families of English Language Learners Title III Weekly Classes: January 2019 - June 2019 Administrator, ENL Liaison, Parent Coordinator, PA Board, ENL/Bilingual Teachers, and Community-based Organizations. Workshops: November 2018, January 2019, March 2019, May 2019, 8  Grace Outreach and the Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education will partner with P186X ENL/Bilingual Teachers to provide high quality preparation courses for the Test Assessing Secondary Completion (TASC)--(formerly known as General Education Diploma or GED). Data to document the increase in formal partnerships between P186X and Community Based Organizations will be collected and maintained with each agreement or contract signed. Documentation of work undertaken in concert with said organizations (as well as that undertaken with less formal partners) will be collected and maintained, and later analyzed for trends. This will include agendas from meetings, attendance lists, and event brochures or programs. Community- based organizations Parent(s) /Guardian(s) and Families of English Language Learners In order to support the effective implementation of these partnerships and ensure attendance and participation, invitations, parent engagement surveys, informational correspondence, newsletters, and electronic publications will be translated into the appropriate language by the Parent Coordinator, designated bilingual/bi-literate staff, and the New York City Translation and Interpretation Unit. School Messenger communication system will be utilized to encourage more effective two-way communication. Parent(s) /Guardian(s) and Families of English Language Learners 3b – Parent and Family Engagement June 2019 Data Collection: Ongoing September 2018-June 2019 Data Analysis: October 2018, December 2018, February 2019, April 2019, June 2019 Ongoing September 2018 – June 2019 Administrator, ENL Liaison, Parent Coordinator, PA Board, ENL/Bilingual Teachers, and Community-based Organizations. Administrator, ENL Liaison, Parent Coordinator, PA Board, ENL/Bilingual Teachers, and Community-based Organizations. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Families will be invited in to participate in the partnerships with the following Community-based Organizations: Urban Arts Partnership Museum of Modern Art GREAT (Division of English Language Learners and Student Support) 9  The Children's Museum of the Arts The Family English Initiative (The Department of Education Division of Family and Community Engagement) The Immigration Law Unit of the Legal Aid Society Citizens' Advice Bureau The Department of Education's Office of Adult and Continuing Education Administration for Child Services IncludeNYC Primerica Fire Department New York Sinergia Office of People with Developmental Disabilities - OPWDD The Parent Coordinator developed a parent partnership program for community agencies to bring in services for the parents/guardians to support services in their homes and lives . Agencies include: ACS, FDNY, PRIAmerica, and INCLUDE NYC. Trainings will be offered every second Thursday of the month. Saturday programs/events will be explored and held, as the agency's schedules allow, in the Fall and Spring. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, English as a New Language (ENL) Liaison, School Counselors, the Attendance Teacher and Administrators will facilitate for parent/guardian outreach. Bilingual and Multilingual staff members will be utilized to ensure that materials related to parental engagement (such as PowerPoint presentations from workshops, invitations to special events and trips, and all documents provided to parent/guardians of ELLs) are made available in the parent/guardians' preferred language. Regarding scheduling, all parent/guardian workshops will take place during Parent/Guardian Engagement time on the extended Tuesdays, alternating between the multiple P186X's annexes and Wednesdays during the Adult Education component of the Title III After-School Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The ENL Liaison will maintain records of all formal contracts and agreements. Documentation of work undertaken with less formal partners will also be maintained by same. For all school events and workshops, surveys will be utilized in order to generate feedback from families to aid in planning future events and workshops. 0  Data Collection: Ongoing September 2018-June 2019 Data Analysis: October 2018, January 2019, February 2019, April 2019, June 2019 Analysis of data will show a mid-year at least 7 partnerships in February, 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Formal contracts and agreements will be retained. Documentation of activities entered into with informal partners (such as agendas, attendance documents, copies of PowerPoint presentations and any hand-outs) will be collected, maintained and analyzed for trends by the ENL liaison. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) - During the day -During the day - During the day - During the day - During the day -During the day - Small Group and one-to-one - Small Group and one-to-one - Small Group and one-to-one - Small group and one-to-one - Small group and one-to-one -Small group and one-to-one -Middle School aged students tutor Early Childhood/Elementary aged students English Language Arts (ELA) Students scoring a 2 or lower on the New York StateEnglish Language Arts Exams Wilson Reading System and Fundations: Word Study for Phonics, Vocabulary, Spelling, Fluency, and Comprehension Raz-Kids: Vocabulary, Reading Comprehension and Fluency Words Their Way: Word study for phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, and spelling STARFALL: Games and stories for early learning skills for Early Childhood students Sight Words: Website: sightwords.com/sight-words/ Readworks: Website: www.readworks.org - During the day -Small Group and one-to-one 2  Mathematics Students scoring a 2 or lower on the New York State Math Exams Myon: Targeted digital reading program with books and articles Fletcher's Place:Targets reading and spelling skills for emergent readers: Focus areas: Phonemic awareness, phonics, vocabulary development, reading fluency, and comprehension strategies Math Minute Sheets: Website: webmathminute.com/sheets Prodigy: A standards aligned math game for grades 1-8 - Small group and one-to-one - During the day - Small group and one-to-one - During the day 3  Science Social Studies N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) - Counseling 2 times per week for 30 minutes; one session is individually with the school counselor, the second session is with the student, one peer and the school counselor. Parent/Guardian outreach and community mental health or medical referrals are completed, as needed. - School nurses assume responsibility for health related services for all of P186X students, as needed or IEP mandates. Socio-Emotional Literacy Technology Program IEP Related Service Mandates: School Psychologists,Social Workers, andSchool Guidance Counselors Social Express - Small group and one-to-one - During the day -During the Day -Classroom Sized Groups 5  6  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. N/A Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). 96 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 7 We purchased 60 backpacks containing items of necessity and comfort (ie, hygienic items) to distribute to the students in temporary housing. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 8  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 9  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Column B Section Reference(s) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, 0  State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  1   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 186X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P186X will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 3  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 4  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) P186X, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 5  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 6  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 7  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 8  ● always try my best to learn. 9  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 0  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: P186X has a total of 678 students in grades K through 8. Of these, 168 (24.78%) are English language learners (ELLs). 24 ELLs are mandated for bilingual instructional services (BIS) and 144 are mandated for Freestanding ENL services. Presently, P186X has one early-childhood alternate assessment Spanish Transitional bilingual 12:1:1 class and one elementary alternate assessment Spanish Dual Language Program with a ratio: 12:1:1. Students at P186X have the following classifications: multiple disabilities, emotional disturbance and intellectual disabilities. Our 214 ELLs are instructed in 12:1:1, 12:1:4, 8:1:1, and 6:1:1 ratios. ELLs are instructed in a free-standing (standalone and integrated) ENL program, self-contained ENL class, Dual Language Program, and Transitional Bilingual Education Program. 146 ELLs participate in alternate assessment and 22 ELLs participate in standardized assessment. 19 other-than-English languages are represented in our school (according to the HLIS) as follows: 187 Spanish, , 4 Arabic, 1 Belorussian, 11 Bengali, 1 Bambara, 1 Ewe, 1 French – Haitian Creole, 5 French, 1 Fulani, 1 Italian, 1 Mandinka (AKA Mandingo), 1 Mandarin, 2 Soninke, 1 Tonga, 4 Twi, 2 Urdu, 1 Vietnamese, 5 Wolof and 1 Yoruba. All of our ELL students participate in an instructional program that addresses their academic language, social, and cultural strengths and needs, and is based on the New York State Common Core Standards and New Language Arts Progressions. Four NYS certified ENL teachers and 2 certified bilingual teacher provide ENL services for ELLs at P186X’s main site and the annexes. Students receive academic support and content instruction with the use of various approaches, methodologies, and classroom techniques such as Cooperative Learning, the Natural Approach, as well as different types of scaffolding strategies such as Modeling, Bridging, Contextualization, Schema Building, Text Representation, and Metacognitive Development. Supplemental Title III Instructional After School Program 44 students are identified for the E-Learning ELL Title III after-school program because they perform below grade level in reading and all content areas, and demonstrate an immediate need to improve their English language skills in order to make content accessible and to facilitate uptake. Instructional programs provided for both alternate and standardized assessment students are aligned to New Language Arts Progressions, Common Core and content area standards. The aim of each program is to enrich and to reinforce instruction provided during the school day by helping students improve their literacy and comprehension skills, vocabulary and overall language proficiency. Three certified TESOL teachers with the help of two paraprofessionals will differentiate instruction according to grade level, IEP goals, and needs of the 44 ELLs. One ENL teacher will provide workshops and ENL classes for parent/guardians of ELLs. In order to promote the growth of future citizens of a technologically advanced world, P186X strives to infuse technology into all its programs. This year, P186X will introduce the realm of animation and digital storytelling to English Language Learners who are performing below grade level in reading and all content areas. The use of a multi-sensory educational animation tool helps to increase the critical thinking ability of a student and is extremely effective with ELLs and students with disabilities who benefit from multi-sensory approaches. 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information English Language Learners at our school have a variety of disabilities such as intellectual disabilities, multiple disabilities and emotional disturbance. All students who have the opportunity to participate in this after-school program will receive monolingual English instruction infused with ENL methodologies during the program. The school received Title III funding in the amount of $22,990.00 this year. The funding will be used to provide direct instruction and to purchase hardware and software in order to engage students in animation and digital storytelling. P186X will use a variety of animation programs to assist students create their own digital stories and facilitate the educational use of technology during Title III afterschool program. The focus of the program is integrating technology into language learning. That is why the subscription to the software program One More Story will be purchased to offer children easy access to the highest quality in children's literature presented in a most entertaining, provocative and creative way. After analyzing the NYSESLAT scores and the results of ongoing formative and summative assessments of the students, it was determined that there was a particular need to improve the writing skills of the students selected for the ELL Title III after-school instructional program. The major focus of the program for this year will be applying technology to improve students' writing abilities through using animation in digital storytelling. This year the Title III after-school instructional program will help support the ELLs to simultaneously develop their skills in writing and in English language acquisition. In order to accomplish this, a Computer Language Lab with four computers will be set up as a Learning Center in the instructional program. Students will use the computers to learn about animation and create their own digital stories. Technology can motivate students in their efforts to improve English proficiency skills and acquire content area knowledge. ELLs are receptive to learning experiences that involve the computer and the iPads, and increased motivation leads to increased language use, which in turn results in improved proficiency and higher performance levels in content area learning. Computer-assisted Language Learning (CALL) has been used for language teaching since the 1960’s. Research (Blake, 1987; Chun & Brandl 1992; Egbert & Petrie, 2003) and practice suggest that the use of technology in the classroom is effective if used appropriately. Students’ motivation is a key factor in this effectiveness, but there are other factors including the individualization of learning, the presentation of materials in a non-linear sequence, access to a variety of authentic materials, immediate feedback and the fact that students are active participants in the learning process. P186X has also researched the effectiveness of implementing computer-based language labs in English as a New Language instructional settings and the findings are very encouraging. Several researchers have reported an improvement in student writing skills through the use of networked computers (Beauvois, 1998; Cononelos and Oliva,1993; Warschauer, 1996). According to Beauvois, students in the networked writing project displayed more fluidity of conversation, more use of complex sentences, and more self- disclosure. She believes that the elimination of strong teacher dominance freed students to express themselves, resulting in a large quantity and better quality of communication. Our Title III program will allow students to express themselves and spark their imagination and creativity using the laptop computers. The laptops will be utilized not only to create animation in digital storytelling, but also in allowing students access to preferred English Language Learning software such as Scholastic, Go!, Zip Zoom English, and On Our Way to English. Alternate Assessment – Wednesday After-School Session English Language Learners who participate in the New York State Alternate Assessment will be provided with the opportunity to be part of the ELL Title III after-school program. The ELL Title III after-school program will meet once a week for 90 minutes from 2:25 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. on Wednesdays for a period of 18 sessions beginning early January and continuing through to mid-June. An administrator will supervise the Title III program this year from 2:25 p.m.-3-55 p.m. The administrator will be paid from 3:25 p.m.-3:55 p.m. 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Students will participate in a comprehensive English development program using animation to create their own digital stories. Students will create their animated digital stories using Fable Vision’s Animation-ish software. Animation-ish is an easy-to-use animation program that inspires creativity and allows ELLS to show what they know. The software has three levels and Alternate Assessment students will be using the most basic level. They will tell a story using a simple set of tools to draw, trace and animate in just three frames. Engaging online and digital tools motivate English language learners. During the instructional program we will use an interactive whiteboard to introduce students to the world of animation utilizing interactive web based programs, E-books and videos. More advanced students will also be instructed in basic keyboarding skills, using software such as Typsey or Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing. Non-verbal ELLs will use iPads as communication devices to answer questions, demonstrate knowledge, express themselves and communicate their wants and needs. Monolingual English instruction with the use of ENL methodology will be provided in two separate groups. One TESOL certified teacher will provide instruction for 12 students in grades 1, 2, 3. The students in this group have intellectual disabilities and are classified as 12:1:1 on their IEP. One Spanish-speaking bilingual paraprofessional will assist the work of the TESOL certified teacher in this group. Another TESOL certified teacher will provide instruction for a second group. This second group will consist of 12 students in grades 4, 5, and 6. The students in this group have multiple disabilities and their IEP mandated staffing ratio is 12:1:1. One Spanish speaking Bilingual paraprofessional will assist the work of the certified ENL teacher. Standardized Assessment – Thursday After School Session English Language Learners who participate in Standardized Assessment will have the opportunity to participate in ELL Title III after-school program once a week from 2:25 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. on Thursdays for a period of 18 weeks beginning in early January through mid-June. An administrator will supervise the Title III program this year from 2:25 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. The administrator will be paid from 3:25 p.m. to 3:55 p.m. Teachers will use Animation-ish software to create exciting lessons and to model the process of animation. Students then learn how to use the tools of the software to animate a story of their choice. Students will develop a love of reading while learning foundational literacy skills using the latest technologies and research as well as an ever-growing library with the software program One More Story. Standardized assessment students will be also introduced to another animation software, Clip studio. ENL teachers will add interactivity to sessions and present material in more visually interesting ways, helping facilitate the students' ability to make text-to-self connections. Working together on the interactive whiteboard will encourage students to collaborate, participate in discussions and demonstrate what they’ve learned. ENL teachers will model writing processes on an interactive whiteboard while students will follow the teacher on their laptop computers. Students will learn how to use the laptop computers to create a digital story using the animation software. This program will utilize the capacity of multimedia applications to offer comprehensible input, teach story telling skills and allow ELLs to express their creativity. Monolingual English instruction with the use of ENL methodology will be provided in two separate groups. One group will have a TESOL certified teacher who will provide instruction for 12 students in grades 3, 4, and 5. The students in this group have emotional disturbance and are classified as 12:1:1 on their IEP. Another TESOL certified teacher will provide instruction for 8 students in grades 6, 7, and 8 in a separate group. The students in this group have emotional disturbance and their IEP mandated staffing ratio is 8:1:1. A Spanish 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information speaking bilingual paraprofessional will assist the work of the certified ENL teachers in each group. The Title III after-school program will use the laptop computers with both alternate and standardized assessment English Language Learners. Teachers will use laptop computers to target the specific learning needs of ELLs who are visual learners, increasing their focus and comprehension. Assessment Teachers provide ongoing assessment of student achievement during Title III after-school program. The work produced through the animation software will be analyzed for evidence of student learning and further needs. The basis for assessment is the student work product, which is evaluated through the lens of various rubrics. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Professional Development will assist teachers gain new knowledge and adopt new practices (Whitehurst, 2002). In alignment with the focus of the instructional program all staff participating in the ELL Title III after-school program (3 TESOL certified teachers, 2 paraprofessionals and a supervisor) will attend conferences and workshops on the topic of technology and language learning offered by a TESOL certified teacher. The third TESOL certified teacher (who will provide ENL instruction to the parents of the ELLs enrolled in the program) will participate so that she is able to educate the parents about the students' learning in the program. This will help the parents support the instruction at home, and reinforce concepts and vocabulary taught to the students. Three TESOL certified teachers will provide on-going professional development for all Title III staff of P186X on computer-assisted language learning. The following topics will be covered during the series of workshops: how teachers can create exciting lessons through animation that represent content visually, how to increase reading comprehension and improve students performance using technology, how paraprofessionals can assist students during computer-assisted language learning, how to improve writing production and revision using Animation-ish software and how to use the iPad as an adaptive communication device. All Title III after-school program staff will receive training during this fourteen-session, one-hour professional development. Three TESOL certified teachers are part of the curricular team and Research has shown that the more competent teachers feel, the more effectively they teach (Berman, P. and McLaughlin, M.W., 1978) and therefore P186X makes high-quality and ongoing professional development a priority element in the ELLTitle III program. All three TESOL certified teachers will provide professional development during all professional development sessions. Professional development will take place on alternate Tuesdays throughout the program from 7:00 a.m. to 7:59 a.m. The supervisor will be paid from 7:00 a.m. to 7:29 a.m. 4  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: P186X will send all pertinent information introducing the Title III after-school instructional program in writing in English, Spanish and Bengali via USPS and with the students. P186X will provide an orientation session for parents before starting the program to inform them about the structure and the goals of the program, and the materials to be used. MetroCards will be provided to the parents to get to and from the workshops. The parent engagement will improve educational outcomes for students, stimulate self-growth among parents, and positively affect school culture. Furthermore, the workshops will increase community involvement, help the parents understand their children's instructional needs, and explain the technology use in the program. ELLoquence online-based English language learning program will be utilized in order to rapidly improve the level of proficiency for parents and help parents understand the curriculum and how to help facilitate home-use of the program. Parents will learn about some exciting educational websites that they can use at home with their children. The focus will be on mobile platform websites and apps as most ELL parents have home access to mobile devices, as opposed to computers. Informational letters will be sent home to instruct the parents on how to use technology at home to help improve their own English language proficiency and that of their children. They will also be offered workshops on the topic of technology for ELLs. The orientation session, adult ENL classes, the Test Assessing Secondary Completion (TASC)--(formerly known as General Education Diploma or GED), and United States Citizenship Preparatory classes will be provided by the certified TESOL teacher after-school for one hour (2:30 p.m.- 3:30 p.m. 18 sessions) on Wednesdays throughout the program, from early January through mid-June. The parent workshops are to run concurrently with the instructional program for the students, but in a separate location in the same building. Additionally, parents who choose not to participate in the workshops will be invited to participate in the instructional program with their child. Furthermore, parents are invited to accompany their children on a trip to the Children’s Museum of the Arts which will take place during the school day on 04/01/2019 (Alternate Assessment Students) and 04/08/2019 (Standardized Assessment Students). Parents of ELLs will have an opportunity to participate in the following workshops: 10/16/2018: Questions to Ask at a Parent-Teacher Conference and how to interpret and respond to the report card; 11/13/2018: How Specific Content Areas are taught in U.S. schools; 12/11/2018: How do specific first languages impact the acquisition of English as a second language; 2/12/2019: Community Resources (such as medical and dental clinics and sources of emergency food and clothing) and how to access them, including filling out necessary forms for reduced or free services; 5/07/2019: Information about the Role of Special School Staff members and the services they could provide, such as the counselor, occupational therapist, physical therapist, speech teacher, and the nurse. These workshops are offered by ENL teachers on alternate Tuesdays from 2:30 p.m. to 3: 30 p.m. at no cost to the Title III Supplemental Program. 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the $16,791.73 Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality N /A staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials $ 4,450.48  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel $90.00 $1,122 Other $535.79 Parental Involvement and Parents' program narrative for this title. Direct Instruction Component: $12,585.24Per session for supervisorcertified ENL teachers, and paraprofessionals1 supervisor x 2 hrs. a wk. @$63.45=$126.90 per wk. x 18 weeks= $ 2,284.202 teachers x 3 hr. a wk. @ $60.65= $363.90 per wk. x 18 weeks= $6,550.202 paraprofessionals 3 hr. a wk. @ $34.73= $ 208.38 per wk. x 18 weeks = $3,750.84$2,284.20+6,550.20+3,750.84=12,585.24Professional Development Component: $3,092.701 supervisor x 7hr. x $63.45= $ 444.152 teachers x 14 hr. x $60.65 =$1,698.202 paraprofessionals x 14 hr. x $34.73= $972.44$444.15+1,698.20+972.44=$3,114.79 Parental Involvement: $1,091.701 teacher x 18 hr. x $60.65= $1,091.70$12,585.24+$3,114.79+$1,091.70=$16,791.73 N/A MacBook Pro: $1,300x 3= $3,900 HP and Brother Toner Cartridge $550.48$3,900+ $550.48=$ 4,450.48 One More Story subscription Parents' transportation to weekly parent workshops $ 594 $5.50x 18 wks.=$99 per parent x 6 parents=$594 Admission to the Children's Museum of the Art: 44 students x $12 = $528 $594+$528=$1,122 Refreshment for parents $250 Reproducible items for parental workshops $250 Postage $35.79 6  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. (Last Year total:$24,782) TOTAL Professional Development $22,990 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name Walter J. Damrosch Day Treatment School Borough Bronx School Number 186 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Ava C. Kaplan Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Yelena Vassilyeva Teacher/Subject Area Beata Derkach /ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A Related-Service Provider N/A Superintendent N/A Assistant Principal Sarah Templeman Coach N/A School Counselor N/A Parent Alejandra Martir Parent Coordinator Maria Arias Field Support Center Staff Member N/A Other (Name and Title) Troy Gorodess, Data Specialist C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 4 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 804 8 Total number of ELLs 240 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 29.85%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 13-14 4 K 2 1 1 2 3 3 7 Lang. SP SP SP SP Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 14-15 17-18 16-17 4 1 12 4 4 2 3 3 5 3 6 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 4 1 5 4 4 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 13 0 0 12 9 9 43 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? P186X uses the Fountas and Pinnell assessment to determine the reading levels of standardized assessment students. The assessment is given two times a year (in the fall and spring). Classroom teachers administer the exam and the data is analyzed to ensure students are working toward the next appropriate reading level. Analyzing the data reflects that ELL students are uniformly found to have the lowest reading levels in their classes. EdPerformance data is also analyzed in order to inventory the reading performance of ELL students. (Baseline Administration - Spring 2017 Grade 3 mean scale in Reading of 2183 (N=20), Grade 4 mean scale score in Reading of 1996 (N=40), Grade 5 mean scale score in Reading of 2184 (N=38), Grade 6 mean scale score in Reading of 2345 (N=42), Grade 7 mean scale score in Reading of 2344 (N=16) and Grade 8 mean scale score in Reading of 2362 (N=27). Alternate assessment students are assessed by the use Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), Formative Assessment of Standard Tasks (FAST), and for grades 3-8 Dynamic Learning Maps (DLM) alternate assessment is a computer-delivered adaptive assessment measuring a student's achievement of the ELA, Mathematics, and Science State Standards at a reduced level of depth, breadth, and complexity. This computerized 9  assessment provides the opportunity to customize the assessment to the individual abilities and needs of the student. It is designed to measure a wide range of proficiencies of students, is quicker and easier to administer and score, and provides useful information to teachers to inform future instruction for the student. . Data from these assessments, with consideration of previous Individual Education Plan (IEP) goals, is used to determine baseline skills in literacy and to develop IEP goals based on each student's needs. A trend present in the SANDI results reflects a need for improvement in the area of reading for information. Student data is used to create appropriate groups for English as a New Language (ENL) classes as well as to differentiate instruction based on Levels of Performance in SANDI. Bilingual and monolingual students in the Dual Language Program (DLP) and bilingual students in the Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE) classes are formally assessed through the use of assessment tools from Estrellita, Marivellas, and Palabras a su Paso Curricula to assess their early literacy skills in Spanish. This data influences the school's instructional plan by helping to determine the types of best practices, instructional methodologies, materials, equipment and communication devices that must be utilized in order to provide access and engage students, to address the individual students' language and literacy skills. By analyzing quantitative data from Estrellita, Marivellas, and Palabras a su Paso it was determined that twenty-four (24) English Language Learners (ELLs) need extra support in writing and building reading comprehension skills in both the English and Spanish languages. A Benchmark Folder system is utilized by ENL/Bilingual Teachers school-wide to track student progress and maintain an ongoing portfolio of student work representative of progress and performance. Similarly, copies of performance data from the various computer-assisted language learning programs employed by P186X ENL and Bilingual teachers are printed and retained with the individual student benchmark folders. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The Bilingual/ENL Liaison creates and distributes a memo at the beginning of the school year to all the ENL/Bilingual Certified Teachers as well as to stakeholders in the school's administration. This letter includes a calendar of important data-collection deadlines throughout the year. Similarly, the Liaison send a series of reminder emails at key intervals in order to ensure that teachers are meeting their deadlines and correctly assessing student progress, and using the information gleaned from such assessments to adjust instruction to best address the learning needs of the student. The ENL/Bilingual teachers analyze the student data on an ongoing basis and adjust instructional methods to meet the needs demonstrated by the students. Throughout the year the teachers are surveyed to see if there is any need for additional support with tracking and analyzing student assessment data. They are asked to explain how their assessment results informed their teaching practices and the goals that are being set for the students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) is met for ELLs based on the formal, informal and summative evaluations. Each ENL/Bilingual teacher maintains a benchmark folder and ongoing portfolio for each student, which includes long-term and short-term goals (which reflect IEP goals) that the students are working on. These Benchmark Folders also include documentation of progress, achievements, and representative samples (ongoing portfolios) of student work. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? After the summative data has been gathered, ELLs who are performing below grade level are invited to participate in the Title III Computer-Assisted Language Learning After-School Program. The programming of the students' services for the upcoming quarter is determined in part by the results of these summative assessment and in compliance with the Commissioner's Regulation 154.2. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] P186X ENL Department provides ongoing professional development to teachers and other school personnel on the development of oral language, students home languages, contextual considerations, and the cultural background of students. NYSITELL data is used to assess the English language proficiency of new entrants whose home language is other than English, as indicated on their Home Language Identification Survey. It is used to determine if the student is in need of Bilingual education and/or English as a New Language (ENL) services. Spanish Language Assessment Battery (LAB) data is used to identify the dominant language of the students identified as having a home language of Spanish. Students with the lowest 0  English proficiency levels are placed in groups with native English speakers which helps to improve social language use. NYSITELL and NYSESLAT data are used to form homogeneous groups (integrated/standalone model) based on the IEP recommendations, ratios and grade level to help students receive instructional support in all content areas. Tier 1 instruction is effectively implemented for ELLs by setting appropriate peer learning and small-group instruction, scaffolding language and opportunities to respond, and promoting language and vocabulary development throughout of the day. Tier 2 intervention is used for standardized assessment students with low reading skills by providing standalone ENL instruction for 45 minutes a day with the use of appropriate practices for building literacy skills and vocabulary development as well as reading skills. Certified Bilingual and ENL teachers use Tier 3 instruction to provide researched-based reading interventions to meet ELLs educational needs by developing an appropriate instructional plan for each ELL . 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. During the Spring of 2017 163 students were assessed using the New York State English as a Second Language Achievement Test (NYSESLAT) and 29 were assessed using the New York State Identification Test for English Language Learners (NYSITELL). P186X has no Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) students this school year. 93 ELLs took the spring 2017 NYSESLAT and scored at the Entering level. 51 ELLs scored at the Emerging level. 14 scored at the Transitioning level, 3 Expanding and 2 ELLs scored Commanding. Patterns across proficiency levels on the NYSESLAT reveal that a majority of our ELLs have higher scores in Listening and Speaking, and lower scores in Reading and Writing modalities. Analyzing the data from the NYSESLAT allowed the ENL/Bilingual Teachers to determine the need for a focus on improving writing and reading comprehension skills. NYSITELL and Spanish Language Assessment Battery (Spanish LAB) data allowed ENL/Bilingual teachers to identify the dominant language of the ELLs and properly place them in groups based on their ratio, IEP mandates, and language proficiency levels. A vast majority of students who were administered the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB scored at the lowest possible level. One kindergarten ELL scored Transitioning and one sixth grader ELL scored Commanding. These results were considered in the placement of these students and in setting instructional objectives. The ELL Data Analysis Tool and ATS RLAT report are used to examine student scores on NYSITELL/Spanish LAB and/or NYSESLAT in order to inform the teachers' decisions regarding programming, scheduling and grouping. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Graphs or charts reflecting ELL Performance on the State Exams in ELA and Math are created in order to show trends and identify areas of need or success. These finding are distributed via email to ENL/Bilingual Teachers and administrators. A hard copy is submitted to stakeholders through the intra-school mailbox system. Emails are also sent to inform the classroom and specialty teachers of each ELL in order to show their proficiency level according to their score on the NYSESLAT exam or, for new students, their scores on the NYSITELL and Spanish LAB. Classroom teachers are provided with suggestions on how ot best support students at each proficiency level in the Special Education classroom. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Five ENL teachers provide standalone and integrated ENL instruction in order to develop and build English language skills. Students are grouped homogeneously. ENL teachers provide 360 instructional minutes per week for Entering/Beginning students (180 standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA). For the Low Intermediate/Emerging students ENL teachers provide two instructional units of study (360 minutes) per week [90 minutes if standalone ENL 1  and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area)]. Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL [90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ENL or any other content area)]. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 total minutes of ENL, with a minimum of 180 integrated ENL/ELA. Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL [minimum of 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area)]. Within the integrated ENL classes, the ENL teacher co-teaches with the classroom teacher in all content areas. Students have access to an array of both printed and digital materials. To ensure that students meet the Next Generation Learning Standards, ENL instruction follows the New York State New Language Arts Progressions and incorporates ENL methodologies such as Cooperative Learning, and the Whole Language Approach. ENL methodologies (e.g. Total Physical Response, the Natural Approach, Language Experience Approach and Whole Language) are used with students with various and multiple disabilities. Bilingual students in monolingual classrooms receive language support from Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals who speak their native language, in order to facilitate full access to the content areas. Within the standalone ENL classes, the ENL teachers takes the ELLs out of their classrooms to a separate location for ENL instruction. ELLs work intensively (individually or in small groups) on the targeted language and on cultural activities. Instruction is provided in English language acquisition, concentrating on vocabulary development, and content-specific phrases and vocabulary. Standalone groups are organized based on students' unique learning needs, learning style, language background, behavioral needs, and IEP goals. The standalone groups are organized heterogeneously (mixed proficiency levels). When planning the ENL standalone schedule the ENL teachers consider the students' classification on the IEP, student-staffing ratio, students' age and the CR Part 154.2 mandate. The schedule is planned to provide the ELLs with the required number of ENL mandated units. b. TBE program. If applicable. P186X has one TBE 12:1:1 Elementary Alternate Assessment Spanish class. Team teaching model is used, with one Bilingual certified and one Special Education certified teacher. Seven out of the eleven students in this class scored at the Entering/Beginner level, and three students have advanced to the Emerging level on the Spring 2018 NYSESLAT. The certified bilingual teacher provides 540 minutes of ENL instruction per week. Students receive 180 minutes of stand-alone ENL per day, 180 minutes of Integrated ENL/content area, and 180 minutes of Home Language Arts per week. The instruction is provided in Spanish on Mondays, Wednesdays and alternate Fridays, and in English on Tuesdays, Thursdays and alternate Fridays. All content areas are taught in both, English and Spanish Art/music/phys. ed are taught in English (using ENL methodologies) for 45 minutes each per week. Differentiated instruction in ENL, HLA and in the content areas (math, social studies, science) is provided throughout the week. Students are grouped by level of language proficiency and academic and functional level for instruction. Students have access to a leveled bilingual library which is aligned to the CCLS in all content areas through the Wonders, My Math, Estrellita, Palabras a su Paso and Maravillas curricula. Students have access to the digital components of the curricula via the Interactive White Board for whole class instruction, and iPads for individual or small-group activities. c. DL program. If applicable. P186X has two Alternate Assessment Spanish Dual Language Program, comprised of three classes. One class serves elementary 8:1:1 students in grades K, 1, 2, 3 and one class serves 8:1:1 students in grades 3, 4, 5. In the second program, one class serves elementary 12:1:1 students in grades 5-7. The DLP at P186X provides dual language instruction at a ratio of fifty percent (50%) in Spanish and fifty percent (50%) in English by two certified bilingual teacher and two certified special education teacher. 50% of the students in each of these classes are monolingual English speakers and 50% are English Language Learners with Spanish backgrounds. The students in the DLP receive 180 minutes a week in HLA, 180 minutes per week in stand-alone ENL, and 180 minutes per week in integrated ENL/content area. The academically rigorous Estrellita (Spanish)/Maravillas (Spanish)/ Palabras a su Paso (Spanish)/ Wonders (English) curricula are used to provide to a wealth of authentic literature from across the Spanish-speaking world and is aligned with the CCLS for social studies and science. These include a rich range of print and digital media, allowing students access to quality Spanish literature, math, social studies and science instructional support in school and at home. The Interactive Whiteboard is used for whole class instruction, with iPads used to support individual or small-group instruction. Formal and informal assessments are utilized as components of the 2  Estellita, Maravillas, Palabras a su Paso ,Wonders, My Math and Mis Matematicas curricula in both English and Spanish. DLP teachers also use informal observations, student performance on tasks, use of AAC devices (low and high tech) and communication boards to assess the students' progress in the acquisition of language skills. An ongoing portfolio and benchmark folder is kept in order to demonstrate the students progress toward meeting their IEP goals 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The ENL/Bilingual Liaison (in collaboration with the assistant principals) creates schedules for TBE, DLP, Self-Contained ENL, and Freestanding ENL (integrated/standalone) based on language proficiency level, IEP mandates, and the grade levels. The assistant principals and the ENL/Bilingual Liaison ensure that the mandated number of units are provided for the students (according to CR Part 154.2) during the school day. The Beginner/Entering students receive 360 instructional minutes per week (180 standalone ENL and 180 integrated ENL/ELA). The Low Intermediate/Emerging students receive two instructional units of study (360 minutes) per week [90 minutes of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area)]. Intermediate/Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL [90 minutes integrated ENL/ELA and 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ENL or any other content area)]. Advanced/Expanding students receive 180 total minutes of ENL, with a minimum of 180 integrated ENL/ELA or other content area. Proficient/Commanding students receive 90 minutes of ENL [minimum of 90 minutes of standalone or integrated ENL (with ELA or any other content area)]. Home Language Arts instruction is provided in both the TBE and DLP for 180 minutes per week. Students' mandated minutes of instruction are programmed in STARS and the teachers comply with these schedules, providing the necessary number of minutes. ELL Data Update Report is reviewed, updated and entered as needed in order to ensure that the mandated number of minutes are provided according to proficiency levels of each program model. This ELL Data Report is disseminated to all ENL/Bilingual Teachers and discussed in order to determine what supports are needed in order help each student move to the next level of proficiency. Grouping and pacing are considered based on this data, as well as the types of instructional scaffolds which will be meet the needs of the students. In order to maintain compliance with all mandates regarding ENL and Bilingual service, P186X holds regularly scheduled meetings each Monday during the school's dedicated professional learning time in order to address necessary scheduling adjustment and also to review the discharge and new admission reports from ATS. These reports are used to quickly identify students in need of testing and/or services and to alert ENL/Bilingual teachers of students joining their classroom/caseload as well as those who have left for another educational setting. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. ENL and Bilingual teachers provide appropriate instructional support to make grade-level coursework comprehensible and accessible for ELLs participating in Self-Contained ENL, Freestanding Integrated/Standalone ENL, TBE, and Dual Language Programs. These teachers use modified assessments that allow ELLs to demonstrate their content knowledge. ELLs are provided with additional time to complete tasks and assessments. P186X ENL/Bilingual teachers are adept at creating opportunities for ELLs to interact with proficient English speakers, and opportunities for ELLs to build on their strengths, prior experiences, and background knowledge. Academic language is a vital part of content-area instruction; the goal is to improve academic vocabulary use and comprehension across all four language modalities (listening, writing, reading and speaking). ENL and bilingual teachers demonstrate strong academic language proficiency and are equipped with the appropriate teaching certifications, engaged in professional development, and skilled in both content and pedagogy. Assistant Principals at P186X serve as supervisors for the ENL/bilingual teachers, visiting their classes to observe and meeting with teachers individually to discuss the quality of their lessons and to ensure that the teachers are providing the mandated number of minutes of services per week. 3  Instructional approaches and methods use to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Next Generation Learning Standards and/or the Dynamic Learning Maps: DLP: scaffolding, task-based language learning, immersion, community language learning, all content areas taught in both English and Spanish languages during the school day (50% English/50% Spanish). DLP uses the academically rigorous Estrellita (Spanish)/Palabras a su Paso /Maravillas (Spanish)/Wonders (English) Words Their Way (English) curricula which is aligned Next Generation Learning Standards for ELA/HLA, Social Studies, and Science. DLP students have use of the curriculum aligned bilingual libraries to provide home language support. TBE: scaffolding, task-based language learning, immersion, community language learning, all content areas taught in both English and Spanish languages during the school day (50% English/50% Spanish). TBE uses the academically rigorous Estrellita (Spanish)/ Maravillas (Spanish)/ Palabras a su Paso (Spanish), Wonders (English)/Words Their Way (English) curricula which is aligned Next Generation Learning Standards and New/home Language Arts Progressions for ELA/HLA, Social Studies and Science. TBE students have the use of curriculum aligned bilingual libraries to provide native language support. Freestanding Integrated/standalone ENL: scaffolding, the Natural Approach, task-based language learning, native language support and all instruction is provided in English with the support of Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals for bilingual students. Home language support in the content areas is provided through collaboration with the content area teachers to teach academic and content vocabulary while simultaneously providing language acquisition support. ENL teachers incorporate multilingual posters, labels, multimedia presentations and dictionaries (picture and word) to help make core content accessible and comprehensible. ENL teachers support the Next Generation Learning Standards aligned curriculum utilized by the classroom teachers. English is used as the instructional language. Self Contained ENL: scaffolding, task-based language learning, The Natural Approach, home language support, all instruction is provided in English with the support of Alternate Placement Paraprofessionals for bilingual students. P186X has a multicultural library which shows appreciation for student's culture, traditions, and builds awareness of and an appreciation for diversity. Home language support in the content areas is provided through multilingual posters, labeling, multimedia presentation and dictionaries (picture and word) to help make core content accessible and comprehensible. Next Generation Learning Standards aligned curriculum is used for instruction in Social Studies, Science, Math (Equals), and ELA. English is used as the instructional language. Multicultural posters are displayed in the classroom to encourage an environment that welcomes all and celebrates all cultures. Bilingual dictionaries, word/picture glossaries, labeling, and visual vocabulary cards for new academic content vocabulary are all elements used to increase access to content in this class. In all program models: Scaffolding strategies are employed to attain significant language proficiency and academic development. Some of the scaffolding strategies used are modeling, bridging, and contextualization. Age appropriate multi-sensory materials, activities relevant to the interest, cognitive ability and the stage of language development of the student, and adaptive technology are utilized to enhance the students' understanding of the content areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? One of the ways in which ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language is through the use of the Spanish LAB. This assessment is designed to evaluate Spanish language proficiency in all four modalities. This helps teachers to place and instruct the students effectively. Students in the bilingual classes are formally, informally and summatively assessed in Spanish proficiency throughout the year. Estrellita and Palabras a su Paso curricula are used to build students Spanish language proficiency skills and the attendant assessments contained therein are regularly administered and reviewed through the benchmarks. Maravillas and Mis Matematicas curricula have ongoing regular formal and informal and summative assessments built-in. Students are grouped based on Diagnostic and Placement Tests in Spanish. Diagnostic placement tests are used to inform instruction and decisions regarding grouping, scaffolding, and staff focus. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 4  a. In order to differentiate instruction for SIFE students P186X starts by identifying prior knowledge and educational experiences. ENL teachers adjust interventions to reflect changing needs at regular intervals and address academic social, emotional and cultural needs of SIFE students. The focus is on literacy and numeracy , arithmetic, and operational skills. Teachers reinforce students' interests and strengths in order to increase motivation and activate prior knowledge. Intense scaffolding (modeling, contextualization, realia, visual support, etc.) is provided to help make content comprehensible to SIFE students and to assist them in acquiring academic and social vocabulary in an accelerated manner. An important element to help improve literacy is reading to our SIFE students everyday. ENL teachers use Tier III RTI interventions with SIFE students. b. In order to differentiate instruction for newcomer students, P186X again starts by identifying prior knowledge and educational experiences. First the newcomer's grasp of the Roman alphabet is assessed, emergent literacy or pre-emergent literacy is assessed, as well as their numeracy and mathematical skills. Independent practice and one-to-one instruction is provided, scaffolded on the students' prior knowledge, taking into consideration their cultural, linguistic and educational background. Newcomer students are paired with peers who are more proficient in English to assist them in feeling comfortable and lowering the affective filter to allow for the newcomer to receive more comprehensible input. An important element to help improve literacy is reading to our newcomer students everyday. ENL and bilingual teachers use Tier III RTI interventions with newcomer students. c. In order to differentiate instruction for our developing ELLs, P186X utilizes homogeneous grouping, builds vocabulary for the content area, and applies Tier II RTI. As time permits, ENL teachers make an effort to provide additional Stand-Alone instructional minutes to this population in order to maintain and exceed their English language proficiency level. d. In order to differentiate instruction for our Long Term ELLs, P186X staff first identifies the student's level of knowledge in each of the subject areas. Standardized test scores, student work and the student record are used to determine this information. Effective differentiation requires ongoing evaluation of students' needs and conscious attention to designing instructional activities and assessment to meet those needs. Content is differentiated for students who are still developing English language skills. ENL/Bilingual teachers facilitate in different ways to help students understand key material and provide evidence of understanding in multiple ways based on their language proficiency levels. P186X ENL/Bilingual teachers use ongoing assessment to guide instructional decisions and track data. Small group instruction is a very effective way of making sure that all students can access important content, and keeping groups flexible allows teachers to match students with different peers for different types of activities. Providing ELLs with alternate ways of accessing key content (e.g., charts, books written in their home language, adapted texts written by the teacher, discussion, etc.) allows them to learn the same material as other students as they continue to develop their English language skills. The focus for Long Term ELLs is on re-contextualizing information previous presented but not effectively learned. In order to differentiate instruction for Former ELLs up to two years after they exit ELL status, P186X provides access to the Title III After School Program. P186X ENL teachers also provide 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL instruction to Former ELLs up to two years after they exit ELL status. ENL teachers use ongoing assessment to guide instructional decisions and provide multiple types of assessment. Small group instruction is used to ensure that former ELLs can access important content. Flexible grouping allows teachers to match students with different peers for different types of activities. Providing ELLs with alternate ways of accessing key content (e.g., charts, books written in their first language, simplified texts written by the teacher, discussion, etc.) allows them to learn the same material as other students as they continue to develop their English language skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers ensure that all lessons/activities include a component for activating prior knowledge and reviewing key concepts. Teachers implement differentiated instruction through lessons and differentiated activities by using the following strategies: chunking information, using visuals, concrete materials, realia, gestures, and repetition. All activities are modeled for the students and students review main concepts and vocabulary with partners and in whole-group sessions at the end of each lesson or activity. Classroom instruction is delivered the following through curricula ELA: On Our Way to English, Wonders, Words Their Way, Palabras a su Paso, Maravillas, Estrellita, and Zip Zoom English. Math: My Math, Equals, and Mis Matematicas. Social Studies and Science: Wonders and Maravillas which are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and TESOL and Bilingual Standards (which are differentiated by grade levels). ENL teachers employ various approaches and methodologies such as Cooperative Learning, Whole Language Instruction, Community Language Learning, and the Natural Approach, as well as different types of scaffolding instructional strategies. Interactive White Boards and iPads are made 5  available to ELLs in order to supplement and foster instruction. The use of technology in the classroom helps to accelerate English language development and provide ELL-SWD access to academic content areas. Adaptive communication devices are essential for working with students placed in classes with 12:!:4 staffing ratios. A variety of attractive and familiar communication devices are regularly employed when working with this population, in order to allow the students to show what they know and also to communicate important needs or desires. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? ENL/Bilingual teachers, classroom teachers and content-area teachers collaborate to identify and implement effective strategies for ELL-SWDs to improve their math, science, social studies and ELA skills in the least restrictive environment. Classroom teachers and ENL/Bilingual teachers plan lessons, create materials and assessment tools, and evaluate the effectiveness of lessons once a week during common preparation periods at the early childhood, elementary and middle school levels. Lessons include teacher/student emergent literacy/adapted books that utilize repetition and picture representation symbols. Through listening and sensory processing techniques, the ELL students learn sound/symbol relationships and improve their vocabulary and expressive and receptive skills. Using 90-minute blocks of time helps to minimize transitional behavior problems to maximize instructional time. ENL/Bilingual certified teachers use differentiation in order to help their students meet their IEP goals. Teachers utilize station learning in order to instruct students with a variety of learning styles and to provide them the necessary time to practice and master skills. Regarding curricular flexibility, ENL/Bilingual Teachers may modify the format of a given task or allow a student to present their work in an alternative manner. Scaffolds such as visual vocabulary cards, authentic multi-cultural literature are regularly employed, as if extended think/response time. Use of the home language during discussion, planning, researching, and other early phases of a project is allowed or encouraged for students determined to likely benefit from such practices. Thinking Maps system of visual representations of cognitive processes are employed throughout the organization (P186x) across all content areas in order to help students show what they know, generate new ideas or brainstorm, organize and categorize, and plan their work. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math and other content areas are provided by ENL teachers during the standalone and integrated model of instruction. Students are sub-grouped based on their language proficiency levels and their abilities. Entering level ELLs are placed with Expanding level ELLs in order to improve their speaking abilities and to be exposed to the proper use of the language. Through the content areas, all four language modalities are addressed. ENL teachers and content area teachers work together to promote the acquisition and uptake of academic language. Bilingual students who receive instruction in monolingual classes have the assistance of an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional to interpret and translate (in order to increase the students' access to the content). Targeted Interventions for ELA: Wilson Reading System and Foundations: Word Study for Phonics, Vocabulary, Spelling, Fluency and Comprehension Achieve 3000: Vocabulary, Reading Comprehension and Fluency. SuperKids: Word Study for Phonics, Vocabulary, Spelling, and Fluency Words Their Way: Word Study for phonics, phonemic awareness, vocabulary, and spelling. Targeted Interventions for Mathematics: Great Leaps Math: Drilled exercises in building mathematics skills in addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division Everyday Mathematics Games: Drill exercises aimed primarily at building fact and operations skills. Math Steps: Practice in basic number concepts, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, decimals, rates, ratios, proportions, and percentages. 6  Math Triumphs: Practice in basic number sense and operations, fractions, rates, ratios, proportions, and percentages Achieve it!: Differentiated instruction diagnose, instruct, prescribe, develop, re-teach, and achieve: skill by skill, individualized instruction & practice, test-taking strategies. Impact Test: Practice test taking strategies - Mathematical practice UNIQUE: Foundational computational skills. Targeted Interventions in Science: Quick Reads: Increase reading strategies and comprehension using Science reading passages. UNIQUE: Inquiry based comprehension skills based on Science content. Achieve 3000: Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Fluency skills using Science articles. Targeted Interventions in Social Studies: Quick Reads: Increase reading strategies and comprehension using Social Studies reading passages. UNIQUE: Inquiry based comprehension skills based on Social Studies content. Achieve 3000: Vocabulary, Comprehension, and Fluency skills using Social Studies articles. The use of native language in intervention programs is as follows: Achieve 3000 and Everyday Math are available in both English and Spanish. All programs are ELL-oriented and incorporate multimedia and visual aids to understanding. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? P186X will continue to seek out, apply for, and implement programs that work with community-based organizations and outside vendors. P186X will continue to work with the EASE (Everyday Arts for Special Education) and the Morgan Library & Museum. Furthermore, P186X plans to partner with The Family English Initiative (through The Department of Education Division of Family and Community Engagement), the Immigration Law Unit of the Legal Aid Society, Citizen's Advice Bureau, and the Department of Education Office of Adult and Continuing Education in order to provide resources and instruction to parents in need of Education, Housing, English Language Acquisition, and naturalization services or advice. Bronx Heritage Music Center, the Bronx River Arts Council, and The Children's Museum of the Arts will partner with P186X in order to incorporate the arts and local culture as a means to improve student achievement in the areas of communication, socialization, academic learning, and arts proficiency. This year P186X embarks on the development of a program to promote awareness of the important of College and Career Readiness for the parents and teachers of ELL students in our middle school. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. P186X uses the integrated model to allow ELLs to receive access to academic instruction and practice without losing their in-class instructional time. Teaching English as a New Language through the content areas using the integrated model allows the students to stay on the same level as their classmates despite their language difference. The ENL teachers in the Integrated, Stand-Alone and Self-Contained environments work to make the content accessible to the ELLs through modification, the use of adapted or enhanced texts, repetition, allowing extended processing time, differentiation and a myriad of other techniques and supports the curriculum of the content area teacher(s). ELLs and their parents are invited to participate in school-time and after school supplemental services [such as our Title III after school program (40 ELLs), College Readiness Program (40 ELLs), and Everyday Arts for Special Education (EASE) sessions (36 ELLs)] through a system of outreach communications. These outreach communications include texts, emails, phone calls, postal mail, and multilingual print materials: flyers, parent surveys, and an ENL newsletter. All outreach communication activities are logged, as is attendance of ELLs and their parent/guardians at ELL and school wide events. The data from parent surveys is utilized to effectively plan and execute meaningful workshops, events, and communication. It also informs choices about which needs are greatest in our ELL community and how to address these needs. ELLs fully participate in all school programs by receiving equal access to their mandated services as per their IEP and the new CR. 154.2. They also fully participate in the supplemental activities and events such as Multicultural Day (100% ELL participation), Special Olympics (100% ELL participation), Field Day (100% ELL participation), STEM Fair (100% ELL 7  participation), School-wide/District 75 Spelling Bee, Reading Race Incentive Program, Math Bowl Incentive Program (varying ELL participation), Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) system and student achievement assemblies (100% ELL participation). State-of-the-art Augmented Communication Devices also serve to facilitate the participation of students with a variety disability which result in communication challenges. ELL-SWDs are afforded equal access to all school programs through the addition of an elevator that now makes it possible to ELLs with disabilities to access resources on all floors of P186X. The library and computer labs are now accessible to all the ELLs and other students. P186X has a Title III After-School Program that has been a great success in promoting English acquisition in all four modalities. Targeting ELLs whose performance is not on grade-level, the ENL teachers are able to provide focused and more individualized instruction during After-School hours. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. During the whole-group instructional time ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers utilize the Interactive White Board. During individual instruction students utilize iPads, laptops and desktop computers. A variety of software programs are employed including On Our Way to English, Estrellita, Wonders, Maravillas, Words Their Way, Palabras a su Paso, My Math, Mis Matematicas, and Zip Zoom English. In the Transitional Bilingual Education classroom the program Estrellita/Maravillas is used to improve students' native language literacy. There is a bilingual library available for use in the Transitional Bilingual Education classroom and the Dual Language Program and a multicultural library available in the ENL resource room. Traditional print materials are utilized in all classes including textbooks, worksheets, fiction and non-fiction stories (and Big Books), flashcards and more. Posters and manipulatives such as cut-outs, realia, and educational games are provided and aligned to each unit, to allow students to work on developing oral language and vocabulary. Adaptive communication devices are an essential tool employed for working with students placed in classes with 12:!:4 staffing ratios. A variety of attractive and familiar communication devices are regularly employed when working with this population, in order to allow the students to show what they know and also to communicate important needs or desires. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In the Freestanding ENL program (integrated/standalone) home language support is made available by an Alternate Placement bilingual paraprofessional who speaks both English and the child's home language. Further home language support is available in all programs in the form of bilingual glossaries, picture dictionaries, and bilingual libraries. In DLP and TBE the Bilingual teacher and paraprofessional provide home language support. Assessment of the home language support is arrived at through feedback from the teaching staff, bilingual clinicians and (when appropriate) from the student. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All ELLs at P186X are grouped based on their IEP recommendations, mandated ratios and grade levels. The required services support ELLs because the instruction in the class is differentiated according to the students’ unique academic needs and backgrounds. The supports are grade and age appropriate because they are guided by the student's individual goals as outlined in their IEPs. Classroom instruction is delivered through curricula that are aligned to the Next Generation Learning Standards, the Dynamic Learning Maps, and New Language Progressions and Home Language Arts Progressions (which are differentiated by grade levels). 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? As P186X has four annexes in separate locations, the ENL/Bilingual Liaison works to ensure that all resources are fairly allocated across all settings. During the whole-group instructional time ENL teachers and Bilingual teachers utilize the Interactive White Board. During individual instruction students utilize iPads, laptops and desktop computers. A variety of software programs are employed including On Our Way to English, Estrellita, Wonders, Maravillas,Words Their Way, Palabras a su Caso, My Math, Mis Matematicas, and Zip Zoom English. In the Transitional Bilingual Education classroom the programs Estrellita, Maravillas, Palabras a su Paso are used to improve students' home language literacy. There is a bilingual library available for use in the Transitional Bilingual Education classroom and the Dual Language Program and a multicultural library available in the ENL Self-Contained Class and ENL resource room. Traditional print materials are utilized in all classes including textbooks, worksheets, fiction and non-fiction stories (and Big Books), flashcards and more. Posters and 8  manipulatives such as cut-outs, realia, and educational games are provided and aligned to each unit, to allow students to work on developing oral language and vocabulary. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). In order to assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year, P186X sends home a welcome letter. P186X also has an informational session that is available for parents before the start of the school year. Before the school year starts, all of the ELL parents are informed of the programs available in the school and invited for a parent meeting where they can meet with the teachers, school administration, and the parent coordinator. Welcome Kits which include teachers' names, bus schedules, volunteer opportunities and more are sent home to families with new ELL children. Due to a high proportion of Spanish speaking ELLs, all communications home are written in both English and Spanish. Translation and interpretation services are available through the Translation & Interpretation Unit and in-house, through a wealth of multilingual staff. P186X features a multilingual Welcome Poster, Language Identification Guide and info cards on translation and interpretation. The school has an open door policy and parents of newly enrolled ELLs are welcome to come and talk to the principal and parent coordinator. New ELLs who enroll throughout the year receive informational materials and orientation regarding the program choices during the Intake process. New ELLs receive mandated services through integrated/standalone models, self-contained ENL, Transitional Bilingual Education class or the Dual Language Program. Additional services are available through the Title III After-School Program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? P186X does not offer any language electives to ELLs. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? a. P186X offers two Dual Language Program classes. One self-contained 8:1:1 Alternate Assessment Spanish grades K-2 and a side-by-side dual language model is used for a 12:1:1 Alternate Assessment Spanish class grades 5-7). In the side-by-side model the two languages are distributed in the following way: students are instructed in one room by an English teacher and in another room by a partner language teacher (Spanish). Students move between the two classroom for instruction. Each teacher works exclusively in one language to two groups of students. 50% of the students in the DLP are English Proficient and 50% are English Language Learners. 50% of instruction is taught in English and 50% of instruction is taught in Spanish. Students learn Math, Social Studies, Science, and HLA in Spanish and ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies in English. b. Each core content area is taught in English and in Spanish. c. Monday, Wednesday, alternate Fridays students receive instruction in Language 1, and Tuesday, Thursday and alternate Fridays students receive instruction in Language 2. d. Emergent literacy is taught simultaneously in both languages. 9  Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? During the designated Monday professional development time, 80 minute sessions are held to ensure that all teachers of ELLs are fully up-to-date on developments in the fields of teaching ELLs and Bilingual students. Certified ENL and Bilingual Teachers lead professional development sessions for grade level team teachers, subject area teachers, paraprofessionals, assistant principals, guidance counselors, psychologists, occupational/physical therapists, speech therapist, secretaries, and parent coordinators based on their needs and the needs of their students (topics include but are not limited to: [ELL RELATED:] Identifying ELLs, Setting Smart IEP Goals for ELLs, Strategies for Differentiating Instruction for ELLs, Co-teaching and Collaboration: ENL and Classroom/Content Teachers Session 1, Co-teaching and Collaboration: ENL and Classroom/Content Teachers Session 2 , Test Taking Strategies for ELLs, and Incorporating Technology in the Classroom to Support ELLs. [BILINGUAL RELATED:] Co-Teaching in the Free-Standing ENL Dual Language Program, Best Practices for Bilingual Education, Keys to Biliteracy, Bilingual Students in the Specialty Classroom: How can we best support students? ELL-Focused and Bilingual-Focused staff and faculty workshops are scheduled on alternate Mondays during Professional Learning time as follows from 2:20PM to 3:40PM on: 9/24/18, 10/22/18, 11/26/18, 12/17/18, 1/28/19, 3/25/19, 5/20/19 Bilingual-Focused Workshops: 10/15/18, 01/14/18, 2/11/19, 4/08/19 District 75 Office of ELLs and the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support provide the ENL/Bilingual Teachers and ENL/Bilingual liaison with ongoing professional development throughout the year. The professional development focuses on research-based data and resources on ENL strategies for differentiated instruction for ELLs with disabilities. ENL and Bilingual teachers attend professional development workshops provided by the Department of English Language Learners and Student Support, which focus on supporting ELLs through the content areas as they engage with Next Generation Learning Standards-aligned curricula. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to meet the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2 15% of total hours for all teachers are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs, ENL and Bilingual teachers will provide on-going professional development twice a month for 80 minutes during designated professional learning time on alternative Mondays. ENL and bilingual teachers will receive minimum of 50% of the required professional development through District 75 Office of ELLs and Department of English Language Learners and Student Support. ENL and Bilingual teachers will educate themselves on language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for ELLs. ENL and Bilingual teachers will create turnkey presentations and provide ELL-specific professional development to classroom teachers during Monday's professional development sessions. In order to compile and maintain a record of agendas, attendance sheets, and copies of certificates of attendance are tracked and collected by the ENL/Bilingual Liaison. Teachers are encouraged to collect copies of agendas and certificates of attendance for their own record, in addition to submitting them to the ENL/Bilingual Liaison. The ENL/Bilingual Liaison, in concert with ENL and Bilingual Department Teachers and District 75 ELL Department Coaches, created a five-year projected calendar to outline the various Professional Learning Opportunities that will be provided to the 0  ELL personnel at the school on the following topics: [ELL RELATED:] Identifying ELLs, Setting Smart IEP Goals for ELLs, Strategies for Differentiating Instruction for ELLs, Co-teaching and Collaboration: ENL and Classroom/Content Teachers Session 1, Co-teaching and Collaboration: ENL and Classroom/Content Teachers Session 2 , Test Taking Strategies for ELLs, and Incorporating Technology in the Classroom to Support ELLs. [BILINGUAL RELATED:] Co-Teaching in the Free-Standing ENL Dual Language Program, Best Practices for Bilingual Education, Keys to Biliteracy, Bilingual Students in the Specialty Classroom: How can we best support students? ENL/Bilingual Certified teachers maintain an ongoing record of professional learnings attended and annually reviews said record in order to ensure that the proper number of hours is dedicated to ELL or Bilingual Specific Professional Development, in accordance with CR 154.2 Agendas and Attendance lists for ELL/Bilingual related Professional Learning Sessions, along with copies of PowerPoint presentations and/or other print materials are maintained by ENL/Bilingual Liaison and stored on site. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? In order to provide annual individual meetings with parents/guardians of ELLs to discuss goals of the programs, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas, P186X sends out letter to all parents/guardians encouraging them to schedule their annual individual meeting (in both English and parent/guardian's home language). Parents/Guardians are also called to arrange the meetings. Interpretation and translation are made available through multilingual school staff and with the assistance of the Translation and Interpretation Unit. Every Tuesday during Family Outreach Day classroom and specialty teachers, in collaboration with ENL and bilingual teachers, create parent informational letters, flyers, and monthly newsletters to inform parents of students' progress and language development needs in all content areas. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Starting from the students’ enrollment in P186X, parents/guardians are welcomed to our school community in many ways. In order to capitalize on this essential time, P186X provides accessible information to parents/guardians to aid them in making informed decisions about their child’s education. A parent orientation meeting is scheduled and held for each new student. P186X educates parents of English Language Learners about the ELL identification process, the variety of educational programs available (Dual Language Program, Transitional Bilingual Education, Self-Contained ENL and Freestanding Integrated/Standalone ENL), and their right to a re-identification process within 45 days of initial enrollment. P186X also takes this opportunity to share with parents, guardians and family members the high expectations that have been established for the education of ELLs. All invitations, flyers, informational correspondence, newsletters, and so on are translated into the child’s home language and written in language that parents can easily understand to ensure that parents and guardians have full access to all pertinent information. P186X encourages meaningful two-way communication between home and school. Adult Education classes are offered (including English for Speakers of Other Languages and Technology) during after school hours. In order to implement New CR Part 154, P186X provides parents annual and individual meetings to discuss their child’s progress in addition to already existing meetings during Tuesday's Designated Parent Outreach Sessions. In the 2016-2017 school year P186X partnered with the Urban Arts Partnership (under the auspices of the ARTS for English Language Learners and Students With Disabilities Grant) to bring in a teaching artist to lead Professional Development for ENL teachers, direct instruction for students, and a series of workshops for parents of ELLs. P186X will continue to seek out, apply for, and implement programs that work with community-based organizations and outside vendors. 1  P186X provides a workshop or series of workshops on the following topics: 10/16/2018 - Question to Ask at a Parent-Teacher Conference & How to Interpret and Respond to the Report Card. 12/11/2018 - How Specific Content Areas are taught in U.S. schools. 2/12/2019 - How do specific first languages impact the acquisition of English as a second language. 5/07/2019 - Community Resources (such as medical and dental clinics and sources of emergency food and clothing) and how to access them, including filling out necessary forms for reduced or free services 6/18/2019- Information about the Role of Special School Staff members and the services they could provide, such as the counselor, occupational therapist, physical therapist, speech teacher, and the nurse. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. None 2 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Ava Cara Kaplan, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 3  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: P186X School DBN: 75X186 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Ava C. Kaplan Title Principal Sarah Templeman Assistant Principal Maria Arias Parent Coordinator Yelena Vassilyeva ENL/Bilingual Teacher Alejandra Martir Parent Alena Medzyanovskaya/ENL Teacher/Subject Area Beata Derkach/ENL Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Troy Gorodess Other Data Specialist N/A N/A Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 06/26/18 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 06/26/18 N/A N/A 4  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X186 School Name: The Walter J.Damrosch Day Treatmen Superintendent: K.Louissant The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Maria Alvares Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Based on family input, data from Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS), Report of Preferred Languages (RAPL), and the school's intake process, the school is able to determine the parent/guardians' specific language needs in order to provide and include them in all facets of their child's academic/behavioral progress and school celebrations/workshops/trainings. When a parent/guardian and child arrive at P186X, Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) certified pedagogues create a rapport with the family in order to establish a positive working relationship. During the intake process, individual interviews are conducted by the Language Proficiency Team (Principal, ENL/Bilingual Certified teachers, Director of CSE and Parent/Guardian of the student) to discuss language strengths and needs and to obtain information from the the family by: * Completing a Home Language Identification Survey * Reviewing IEP information and conducting interviews in order to assess the primary language needs of the family and child * Completing a Parent Need Assessment form 5  * Where applicable, translators/interpreters assist monolingual clinicians and staff in the intake process * Where applicable, an Alternate Placement Paraprofessional is assigned to the student in order to translate instruction from English to the child's home language and is introduced to the parent/guardian in order to increase their comfort level and help them feel included in the school community * P186X' parent coordinator completed training and is a certified Spanish to English, English to Spanish interpreter/translator 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral 2 4 1 536 1 1 1 1 4 161 N/A N/A N/A Arabic Bengali Chinese English Fulani Italian Malinke Mandinka Wolof Spanish N/A N/A N/A .22 2.21 .001 60.56 .001 .001 .001 .001 2.21 18.19 N/A N/A N/A 2 4 1 532 1 1 1 1 4 164 N/A N/A N/A .22 2.21 .001 60.11 .001 .001 .001 .001 2.21 18.53 N/A N/A N/A 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. 6  Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. August, 2018 September, 2018 Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit October, 2018 November, 2018 December, 2018 Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit School Schedule Time Change Parent Letter Welcome Letter School Calendar Parent Meet & Greet Invitation Letter Parent Needs Assessment Survey Parent Handbook Parent Workshops and Activities Calendar After-school Program Letter Parent Teacher Conference Letter Parent Letter for Compliance with Medicaid Requirement Invitation and Flyer for D75 Bronx PC Winter Wonderland Event Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Letter for Emergency Response Protocol ELL Questionnaire for Parents Learning Environment Parent Survey Letter January, 2019 Parent Letter School-Based Policy Use of Cell-Phones February, 2019 March, 2019 Spring Project Parent Letter Parent Teacher Conferences Parent Letter for Nomination and Election to the PTA of P186X JA1 Form Letter for Summer Program April, 2019 May, 2019 June, 2019 Invitation and Flyers to District 75 Bronx PC Family Fun Day Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit 7  Parent Letter to Inform NYS Science Testing Dates Parent Letter to Inform NYS ELL and Math Testing dates _____________ Interim Reporting Form _____________ Parent-Teacher Association Meeting Notices Parent Workshop Flyers _____________ Parent Newsletter ____________ Approximately every six weeks _____________ Monthly _____________ Bi-Monthly 8  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Ongoing November, 2017, March, 2018 IEP Meetings Parent-Teacher Conferences Walk in or Phone Conferences with Parent Coordinator Walk in or Phone Conferences with Counselors/Clinicians Walk in or Phone Conferences with Related Service Providers Attendance Teacher Phone Conferences / In Home Visits School-wide Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Ongoing Monthly provide interpretation service(s)? Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit 9  Workshops Borough-wide Workshops Monthly District Workshop Every 2 Months Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit Multilingual Staff, NYC DOE Translation and Interpretation Unit 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency.  Use pre-existing translated materials including multilingual text blast through SchoolMessenger system  In case of emergency, limited English proficient families are contacted through the SchoolMessenger System, whereby a recording of any announcements can be sent in the preferred language of the parent, which is beneficial in reaching parents with limited literacy.  Bilingual secretaries assist Spanish speaking families (22% of all families)  Interpreters or interpretative services are used as needed through the Translation and Interpretation and Multilingual Staff  Parent Coordinator is available via cell phone, email, and in-person  Create or translate printed materials into commonly spoken foreign languages  In the case a parent could not be reach by telephone, text, or other means, the attendance teacher will bring a letter from the school in the preferred language to the student's home Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During September 2017's Staff Orientation Meeting, the Principal instructs the staff of the importance of translating and interpreting in accordance with Chancellor's Regulation A-663. It is made clear that language access is a priority in our school. The importance of translating and securing qualified interpretation is also explained again in the school handbook which is distributed to all staff at the beginning each school year. For immediate assistance, each annex of our school has a list of languages known by the staff at each site. The Translation and Interpretation Unit is utilized to translate/interpret for lower incidence languages. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 0  Every September notices will be sent home via backpacks notifying parents/guardians of the translation and interpretation services available in school. We also provide this information at our annual meet and greet parent/guardian workshop in September. Multilingual signs and posters near the school's entrance way and main office also indicate the availability of language services. Notice for parents/guardians regarding language assistance services will be given to parents/guardians in English and in the parents'/guardian's primary language every September and is included in the intake packet of every new admittance. P186X posts on the Family Bulletin Board in front of the main office a sign in the most prominent of the covered languages (Spanish), English and the 2 other languages covered by the Translation and Interpretation Unit (Bengali and French) indicating the availability of translation and interpretation services. The School's safety plan procedures ensure that every parent/guardian who needs language access services understands their rights to translation and interpretation and how to access such services and will not prevent from reaching the schools' administrative offices solely due to language barriers. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? During the Parent/Guardian-Teacher conference events at P186X, limited English proficient parents and guardians are asked to fill in a survey that addresses the quality of translated documentation, addresses quality of interpretation, addresses availability of these services, and inquires as to general satisfaction with language related services available at the school. The data from these surveys is aggregated and interpreted in order to ensure the language services available at P186X are meeting the needs of the parent/guardians. For parents/guardians who do not attend Parent/Guardian-Teacher conferences the surveys are sent home in the student's book bag, with a note in the parents preferred language language offering multilingual telephone assistance in completing the survey. 1 
