 11X189 School Name: CORNERSTONE ACADEMY FOR SOCIAL ACTION Principal: JAMES BELLON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action Elementary School 321100010189 School Number (DBN): 11X189 Pre-Kindergarten through Grade 5 3441 Steenwick Avenue Bronx, New York 10475 7187946160 Phone Number: Fax: 718 794 6160 James Bellon Jbellon@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: James Bellon MelissaBowman Leticha Browne James Bellon Vacant None None District Information Geographical District: 11 Superintendent’s Office Address: Jeremy Kabinoff Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue Bronx, New York 10469 Jkabino@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: 718-519-2626 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 FordhamPlaza, Bronx, NY 10458 JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov ) Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) James Bellon MelissaBowman LetichaBrowne None None None None None *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Danyel Bennett DianeMaldonado Evelyn Figueroa Member/ Staff Member/ Staff Member/ Staff   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Alesha Collins Eddie DeJesus Nakisha Henry Justine Georgiadis Vacant Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Staff Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview   Hornet Pride _______________ Mission The mission of The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action, PS 189, is to ensure that all students become compassionate, resilient, productive lifelong learners by providing a positive, safe and nurturing learning environment developed through partnerships between the school, families and community. This will be achieved by utilizing educational practices which engage each student in a culturally responsive and challenging curriculum with a focus on social/emotional awareness of themselves, others and the world around them. Vision We envision a school community that empowers all students to embrace learning, achieve their personal best and build their social, emotional and physical well-being. Our students are curious and creative learners who succeed through personal initiative and sustained effort. They:  Respect themselves, others and property  Take ownership and are accountable for their work and actions.  Collaborate to contribute to our school community.  Have fun! Our families are active partners in their child’s learning and school community by: Supporting the policies, procedures, and practices of our school which are in the best interest of all students.   Ensuring their child comes to school ready to learn.  Engaging in open, ongoing communication with our school.  Promoting student success through volunteering their time and providing resources to support school programs and activities. Our staff believes that all students can achieve their personal best when their social, emotional and physical needs are met. Our staff meets those needs by:  Creating a learning environment that is nurturing, inviting, supportive, and safe.  Providing families with resources, strategies and information that help students succeed.  Engaging students in a culturally responsive curriculum which is fun, purposeful and challenging.  Being committed and invested in the continual growth and improvement of the CASA/PS 189 community. Our community collaborates with our students, families, and staff to ensure our students thrive in their academic and personal lives by:  Providing programs and resources that meet the needs of all our students and their families.  Supporting school initiatives and activities that create continuity between the school and the community. Our Shared Values Trust Respect 5C’s Collaboration 0  Commitment Communication Consistency Celebration Our instructional Focus for this year is: “If teachers monitor student’s understanding through the use of ongoing formative assessment and use this data for conferences and small group instruction, then students will be able to better recognize and demonstrate characteristics of grade level work in reading and writing.” 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. We at Cornerstone Academy for Social Action (CASA) promote the philosophy that all students can grow both academically and social-emotionally. All adults in the community are expected to provide all children and their families with the necessary support systems to facilitate their success in school. This belief is evident in CASA’s revised Mission, Vision and Values Statement. FOr teh past two years we have collaboratively worked with PS 97 with a focus on small group reading and writing instruction. Last year we embedded the New Teacher Center protocol, Analyzing Student Learning Tool, school-wide to better identify students areas of strength and growth. Through professional development we have been engaging the staff in rigorous professional learning in how the use of assessments are critical not only in the creation of small groups for instruction but also to plan the nessessary scaffold and supports so that all students can be successful. Upon visiting classrooms at CASA, observable practices and systems include but are not limited to: ● Grade appropriate CCLS-based authentic student work that reflects the units of study and that includes appropriate actionable feedback to guide each student's learning ● Anchor charts and experience charts which represent the current unit ● Classroom libraries that are organized based on genre, level and/or content ● Clearly defined areas in the classroom in the content areas ● Current units of study with both essential questions to guide student learning and appropriate actionable feedback ● Evidence of the workshop model in all subject areas ● An online database and data binders in Google which support the collection, analysis and use of data ● Flexible groups ● The use of technology to differentiate instruction and to make the curriculum accessible ● Teachers conferring with students and recording their notes ● Teacher/ student discussions that drive instruction 1  ● The use of best practices to address all learners' needs ● Feedback “next” steps for student growth ● Evidence of questioning and discussion and the CCLS speaking and listening standards in the planning and execution of curriculum in all content areas ● Data-based student grouping for extended day and after school ● The use of the Common Core Learning Standards as evidenced by classroom instruction, conferencing notes, lesson and unit planning, and the development of CCLS and Benchmark Education, NYCPT or Teacher's College aligned rubrics and checklists In addition to our focus on academic excellence, there has been a continued, effective effort to improve classroom climate. School wide we have implemented Positive Behavior Intervention System (PBIS) . Our ROCKS Matrix clearly conveys the expected behaviors in all areas of the school. Students are rewarded for following the rules through our program. You will notice: ● Posted classroom expectations ● Systems for tracking and monitoring behavior which include Class Dojo, PBIS Incentive Days, Tier II individual behavior charts and Check and Connect Program Teachers have the flexibility to define the rules more specifically for their particular room or learning area. Partnerships: For the 2018-2019 school year we are partnering with the following initiatives: Universal Literacy, the New Teacher Center, Wallace Leadership Fellows and Teacher Leadership including a Peer Collaborative Teacher (PCT) and two Model Teachers . The goal of these partnerships is to develop the professional learning communities at PS 189 through the introduction of school-wide protocols for analyzing data, student work and teacher practice with the goal of improving student achievement. This work will be supported through learning walks led by the instructional cabinet, teacher inter-visitations and implementation of lesson studies of collaborative planning and reflection on all grade levels. As a District 11 school we have been afforded the partnership with Algebra for All. This partnership has changed our instructional program in grades 4 and 5 where for the first time these grades will be departmentalized. Another District 11 initiative is participation in the Instructional Focus Initiative. For the past two years we have worked collaboratively with PS 97 with a focus on strengthening best practices in small group reading and writing instruction. Other partnerships are the Blended Learning Pilot and Computer Science for All. With Blended Learning we will recieve ongoing professional development throughout the school year with the goal of increasing the use of technology in our classrooms to support student choice, differentiation and engagement. We also have partnerships that support the arts. These partnerships are with New Victory Theater, American Ballet Theater and Education through Music. These partnerships will allow our school to enrich our program by exposing our students to music, dance and theater. 2  A final partnership we have is with New York Road Runners. This collaboration allows our supports our vision for students living a healthy lifestyle through physical activity. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. In looking at our Equity and Disproportionality Dashboard as well as our State Report Card the following populations are as follows: Student with Disabilities had an increase of 6% in Math proficiency however they are still only 11% proficient as a group English Language Learners are only 8% proficient in Math and this was a 2% drop from the previous year Our Males had an 11% increase in proficiency in ELA however they are still 14% behind the females Student with Disabilities had an decrease of 6% in ELA proficiency English Language Learners are only 0% proficient in ELA and this was a 22% drop from the previous year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In reviewing our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide the Framework Element Scores which we made the most progress in last year were: Rigorous Instruction and Strong Family-Community Ties. This was evident by growth in Rigorous Instruction from 4.01 to 4.14 and Strong Family Community ties from 3.20 to 4.08. The Rigorous Instruction Growth was also noted in the MOLP Rating of Well Developed in the following areas: 1.1 Curriculum; 1.4 Learning Environment and 2.2 Assessment. Over the past year the areas which the school has made the most progress has been Effective School Leadership. This was evidenced by growth is the following areas on the Principal Performance Review. 1.1 Curriculum is now Well Developed 1.4 Learning Environment is now Well Developed In reviewing our 2017-2018 School Quality Guide the Framework Element Scores which our key areas of focus for this school year is the area of Trust. The Framework Element score of Trust dropped from 3.99 to 3.72. We will specifically forcus on Teacher-Teacher Trust because only 67% of teachers agreed that "they trust each other." In addition compared to teh district and to the city we scored 9% and 12% lower respectively. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X189 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration PK,0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 373 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 29 29 20 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 2 N/A 20 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 85.5% % Reduced Lunch 4.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.1% 44.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.9% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.23 0% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 35.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 65% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 51 51 91.6% 2.4% 18.2% 49.3% 0.5% 2.9% 2 3% 9.3 34.1% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. At PS 189 The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action we use a variety of curricular resources to support our students in meeting the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The curriculum resources we use are: Benchmark Education Reading and Writing, Go Math and Engage New York Math units of study, Exemplars Math and lastly in grade 5 we will have the additional support of ALgebra for All.. All of our teacher follow the workshop model which is based upon a gradual release of learning to the students. In addition our teaching staff plans differentiated instruction which allows for tiered support for students who may need a different entry point to a lesson. Strengths of the school: Based upon our 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review Feedback 1.1 Curriculum 1.3 Resource Allocation 1.4 Learning Environment 2.2 Assessment 3.4 High Expectations 4.2 Teacher Teams 5.1 Monitoring and Revising Areas For Improvement 5  Based Upon 2016-2017 New York State ELA and Math Assessment Date (see below) Continued growth in percentage of students reaching proficiency in ELA Based upon our 2017-2018 Principal Performance Review Feedback 1.2 Pedagogy 3.1 Goal Setting 4.1 Teacher Feedback Based Upon 2018-2019 New York State ELA and Math Assessment Date (see below): 1. an are of strength was an 7% increase in students attaining proficiency on the New York State ELA Exam. This includes 51% of our grade 4 stduents who reached proficiency. 2. a priority need which we identified was New York State Assessment Data Analysis (Taken From our 2017- 2018 School Quality Guide Workbook): Upon review of our New York State Testing Data the following information is pertinent in the formation of this goal Category EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS - State Exams EMS Next Level Readiness Metric ELL Progress (CtAG) ELA Percent Proficient Math Percent Proficient ELA Mean Proficiency ELA Mean Proficiency - CTT (CtAG) ELA Mean Proficiency - ELL (CtAG) ELA Mean Proficiency - Low City (CtAG) ELA Mean Proficiency - Sch Low third ELA Mean Proficiency - SC (CtAG) ELA Mean Proficiency - YMOCL3 (CtAG) Math Mean Proficiency Math Mean Proficiency - CTT (CtAG) Math Mean Proficiency - ELL (CtAG) Math Mean Proficiency - Low City (CtAG) Math Mean Proficiency - Sch Low third Math Mean Proficiency - SC (CtAG) Math Mean Proficiency - YMOCL3 (CtAG) MS Course Pass Rate of former 5th Graders EMS Supportive Environment Least Restrictive Environment Value 50.0% 34.3% 33.3% 2.62 2.06 2.14 2.11 1.98 1.72 2.11 2.50 2.21 2.28 1.99 1.78 1.61 1.91 96% 0.07 N 16 169 174 169 24 13 48 36 16 31 174 24 16 57 38 17 33 56 59 6  EMS Supportive Environment EMS Student Characteristics EMS Student Characteristics Part 2 – Annual Goal Greater than 90% Attendance 69.4% 366 Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, through targeted small group instruction and the use of researched based Academic Intervention resources there will be a 5% increase in the ELA Mean Proficiency for students who are in the School's Lowest Third. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Programs/Professional Development/Systems and Structures: 1. Continuation of the school’s AIS/RTI Plan which includes: a daily AIS block for students in grades K-5, who are in need of Tier II and III Intervention. This will be taught by the ICT Special Education Teacher through the use of Leveled Literacy Intervention Kits, and using Fountas and Pinnell and the LLI kit as a benchmarking and progress monitoring tool for students who are in need of tier II and tier II interventions Implementation of Benchmark Education ELA Curriculum as our Kindergarten – Grade 5 ELA Curriculum 2. For all systems and structures the time frame is September 2018-June 2019 1. Students who are in need of AIS intervention 2. All Students in grades K-5 3. Students in grades K-5 4. Support all staff 5. Support all staff 6. Support all staff 3. Use of School funds to support the position of 7. Support all staff Peer Collaborative Teacher and two Model Teachers as well as centrally funded ULIT coach. 4. Ongoing Professional Development in the Benchmark ELA Curriculum in particular the Phonics/Wordwork component through Monday PD Time, Grade Meetings and Conference Days. 5. Have Focus short inquiry cycles using Bryk's Theory of school improvement while looking at student work and assessments in Reading and Writing. 6. Use Google Docs and Google Sheets as a data collection system to allow for easier collection of formative assesment data which in turn will allow for more time to be used in differentiating instruction. 7. The use of the Analyzing Student Learning Tool school wide as a parctice to identify class and grade wide strengths and areas on need of support. Point Persons 1. AIS/RTI Team Members 2. Administration and Grade Leaders 3. UFT Peer Collaborative Teacher. ULIT Coach 4. Administration and Professional Development Team 5. Administration, Professional Development Teamand Members of the RTI/AIS Team 6. Administration and Grade Teams 7.Administrators and Grade teams Implementers: 1. ICT Teachers on all Grades k-5 2. All K-5 Classroom Teachers 3. PCt and Model Teachers 8  4. Admin, PCT and Model Teachers Teachers who attend Central and outside PD Sessions 5. All classroom teachers 6. All Classroom Teachers 7. All classroom Teachers Point Persons: 1. Administration and Grade leaders 2. AIS/RTI Team Members 3. Administration, ENL Coordinator and Professional Development Team Implementers : 1. All K-5 teachers 2. All K-1 Teachers, Special Education Licensed Teachers Teachers of ENL Students 3. All K-5 teachers Administration, All Teachers and Parent Coordinator Sub-Groups: 1. Common Planning. During common planning teachers will use data to address student needs through the creation of strategy groups. 1. All Teachers and all sub-groups 2. Lowest Performing Students. For all subgroupsthe time frame is September 2018-June 2019 2. Our Lowest Performing students will have their needs identified and addressed through the use of the Analyzing Student Learning Tool 3. Teachers of ENLs Students 3. Our English language learners (ENLs) will have their needs better addressed through the use of practices learned at the Ell professional Developments. These strategies will be turn-keyed during Monday Professional Development time and found in our Google Drive. Parent Engagement: All Parents  Monthly Newsletters  Use of Tuesday Parent Time to meet with parents  Use of Remind to notify parents of school events  Creation of a Parent Professional Development Series around best practices in supporting their child's reading and writing success. For all systems and structures the time frame is September 2018-June 2019 9  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be a series of monthly workshops to support the families in understanding Rigorous and CCLS aligned instruction. These workshops will include: 1. the use of "Read to Me " cards as a resource and support of families in the shifts in supporting their students in developmentally appropriate reading strategies, sight words and questions as they progress through different reading levels over the course of the school year. 2. In addition our families will be engaged in workshops on our ELA curriculum: Benchmark Education. They will be supported through our balanced literacy block as well as how they can support their child at home for reading independently. 3. Parent Workshops on student assessment tools. This workshop will include how students and parents can use curriculum based rubrics and checklists to support student writing. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Benchmark ELA Curriculum Coaches to Support Benchmark ELA Curriculum Substitute Teacher Days to cover for professional development, Substitute Teacher Days to Cover Inter-Visitations Teacher Leaders: Two Model Teachers and Peer Collaborative Teacher Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. In February 2018 we will compare our Kindergarten through Grade 5 Mid-Year assessment data (using the NYC Performance Task and F&P) to the September Baseline assessment data to ensure that we are on track to meet our goal. We will know that we are on track if 33% of students are approaching proficiency, meaning that they are scoring at high level 2 when scored using a CCLS aligned rubric. 2. In addition we will look at our in unit and end of unit Reading and Writing data to ensure the number of students who are attaining Grade level standard is approaching our goal from when compared to our September. We will be looking at a gradual increase in proficiency on these assessments for example if in September 15% of students are 0  proficient we would expect to see a minimum of 23% of students proficient by February which would be half way to meeting our end of year goal. 3. At the end of every 6 week AIS cycle we will assess students to ensure they are making progress toward end of year grade expectations. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) We will use our Baseline Assessments which are CCLS aligned and in unit and end of unit Reading and Writing assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Data Sources: The data for the goal in this Tenet was taken from the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide Strengths: The school already has a PBIS structure in place and these new initiatives will support it. The school has systems in place for consistent implementation of expectations and discipline school-wide. There are staff members who are trained in Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and Restorative Justice. School-wide training and implementation of Restorative Circles Needs: After reviewing the data the following question only 63% of teaching staff agreed or strongly agreed "teachers say teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom.". Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018, through the implementation of a school wide PBIS system which includes interventions and supports for students in need of tier 2 and 3 supports there will be a 10% increase in the number of teachers who respond “Strongly Agree or Agree” to the learning environment survey “"teachers say teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom."” (an increase from 63% to 73%). 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Point Persons: Administration, dean , School Counselors , SAPIS worker and the PBIS Team Implementers Classroom Teachers SAPIS Worker Dean Guidance Counselors Programs/Professional development: 1. Creation of a Dean position 2. PBIS 1. All Students September 2018-June 2019 2. All Students 3. All Students 4. . All Students 5. All Students 6. All students 7. All Students 8. Select Students 9. All students We have a school-wide PBIS model which includes the use of Class Dojo as a behavior management and tracking system. We have a school store set up where students can spend their Dojo points. 3. Monthly PBIS Assemblies created by the dean and guidance department. This assembly will cover the areas of expectation in the PBIS matrix and will also celebrate student attendance and behavior. 4. Restorative Circles On A bi-weekly basis all classes will participate in restorative circles. 5.School wide Color Code system: School wide we will have a color card system for students. This color system will go from red through Mascot. Students will begin the day on Green and can travel up or down based upon following our PBIS matrix 6. Peace Place and Reflection area: each classroom and cluster room is mandated to have two clearly delineated areas: Peace Place and Reflection Area. The Peace Place is an area for students to deescalate when upset. The Reflection area is the place where students go to reflect upon their behavior when it does not align with the expectations of our PBIS Matrix. 3  7. PBIS Incentive Cycle. Every 6 weeks students will have a reward cycle based upon how many Dojo Points they received for aligned to matrix behaviors. This reward cycle will include student choices based upon what level they attain. 8. PBIS ROCKStar Assembly. Assembly designed to celebrate the ROCKStar and Most improved students behaviorally in each class. This celebration will follow the same 6 week cycle as the PBIS incentive day. 9. SAPIS worker will have weekly lessons in all classrooms which will address expected personal behaviors. Subgroups: For this goal all sub-groups will be addressed since it encompasses all students. All students September 2018-June 2019 Parent Engagement: 1. Parents and guardians will be invited in to the monthly PBIS assemblies with the dean and guidance counselors 2. Monthly Parent/Guardian Workshops through the Family Coordinator. All Staff September 2018-June 2019 Point Persons: Administration, dean , School Counselors , SAPIS worker and the PBIS Team Implementers Classroom Teachers Point Persons: Administration , Dean, Guidance Counselors, SAPIS worker and Parent Coordinator Implementers: All Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The parent coordinator will have monthly workshops around ways in which she can support families in navigating the school and the DOE at large. This will start in September and carry out the 3rd Thursday of each month. 4  In addition she will have computers in her office to support the families use of technology. The workshop series for this year around PBIS and supportive environment will include : 1. Elements of a Safe and Inclusive School Climate  What is a safe and inclusive school climate?  Review the General Response Protocol  Discuss the Respect for All Program 2. “Let’s Communicate”  Procedures and Protocols to reduce incidences  How parents can help their children cope with feelings of frustration, anger, sadness, or fear  How to communicate with the school 3. Home/School Connection  How to build a strong collaborative partnership between the school, students, and families  The importance of leveraging productive conversations between parents in the face of conflicts 4. Restorative Circles  What are they?  How we are using them to support a safe and inclusive environment for all students Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our Funding to purchase:  Purchase of incentives for students who have behaviors aligned to PBIS Matrix  Refreshments to serve to parents during “Parent Coordinator Workshops”    Creation of an out of classroom position of a Dean/SAVE room “Awards at the Monthly Dean/Guidance counselor assemblies as well as the PBIS ROCKStar assemblies. Supplies for Flip A chart System Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 5  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midpoint will be February. Progress toward our goal will be measured through: We will have the parents complete a brief on-line survey to see the impact of our Family Coordinator Workshops. We will compare our OORS incidents from 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 to see if there is a decline. We will create a Google form survey for staff where they will be asked to respond to the following question: “"teachers say teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom." Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. A Google form survey where we are looking for an increase in the number of staff m,embers who “Strongly Agree or Agree” to the statement "teachers say teachers help maintain discipline in the entire school, not just their classroom." Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Sources: The data for this goal was based upon the March 2018 Principal Performance Observation Feedback Findings 3.1 During the visit there were inconsistencies in the use of data observed during the PLC visits. Strengths: The Principal has clear structures in place to ensure all teachers are engaged in structured inquiry based professional collaboration. Teachers meet in teams to address attendance issues, grade levels meet to make adjustments to curriculum and plan units, the PBIS team meets in addition to the Principal ensuring structures are in place to check in with teacher leaders. The Principal also has establish distributive leadership structures to ensure teachers are involved in key decisions made by the school. Needs Teacher teams must take advantage of the student data and schoolwide student assessment data to improve teacher practice and create goals for groups of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2018 all teacher teams will engage in cycles of inquiry using student data and school wide assessment data to improve teacher practice and create goals for groups of students as measured by a 1 rubric level increase in Quality Review Indicator 3.1 7  8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Programs/Professional Development/Systems and Structures: 1. Staff will be provided professional development on key components of Danielson’s Framework , specifically, 3d Using Assessment in Instruction using the crosswalk from New Teacher Center 2. Staff will be engaged in learning walks and inter-visitations with a focus on 3d Using Assessment in Instruction 3. Administration will participate in professional development in observation practices aligned with the Danielson Framework. 4. Staff will participate in Lunch and Learns where we will identify and plan our next steps in Using Assessment in Instruction using the crosswalk from New Teacher Center 5. Staff will will participate in professional development in using the Analyzing Student Learning Tool from the New Teacher Center. This tool will assist in identifying 4 groups of students : far below, approaching , at and exceeding grade level. The teachers will then identify areas of strength and areas of growth for each level. Teachers will then plan necessary scaffolds and supports 6. Use Google Docs and Google Sheets as a data collection system to allow for easier collection of formative assessment data which in turn will allow for more time to be used in differentiating instruction. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? 1. All Teaching Staff September 2018-June 2019 2. All Teaching Staff 3. Principal and Assistant Principals 4. All Teaching staff, Administration and UFT Teacher Center Staff Developer 5. All PLCs 6. All PLCs Point Persons: 1. Administration and Professional Development Team 2. Administration and Professional Development Team 3. Administration and Professional Development Team 4. Administration and Professional Development Team 5. Administration and 3 Teacher Leaders engaged in NTC work 6. Administration Implementers 1. All teaching staff 2. All teaching staff 3. All teaching staff 4. All teaching staff 5. All teaching staff 6. All Teaching Staff 9  Subgroups: As classroom teachers use various assessments they will keep in mind the various sub-groups within their classrooms. In addition on the spreadsheets we use to track data students’ sub-groups will be indicated. This will allow us to track progress of student groups over time. 1. All Teaching Staff September 2018-June 2019 Parent Engagement: On an ongoing basis after major in-class assessments, classroom teachers will send home Assessment Notification Forms. These forms will inform the parents how their child performed and areas in which the parents can help support their child. All Students and Families September 2018-June 2019 Point Persons: All Classroom teaching Staff Implementers: All Classroom teaching Staff Point Persons: All Classroom teaching Staff Implementers: All Classroom teaching Staff 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. On a weekly basis during Tuesday 40 minute engagement time we will try a variety of workshops and meetings to engage our families in the school events and the school as a whole. To support this we will employ the use of the remind app. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Purchase of All In Learning Alignment of School schedule for multiple common planning periods during the week for grade level PLCs Use of Funding to support 1 Peer Collaborative Teacher and two Model Teachers Use of school funds to provide substitute coverage for 3 staff members to be trained as New Teacher Center Mentors. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 0  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place based upon a percentage change in teacher ratings in teacher effectiveness ratings with meaningful formative feedback and next steps from short, frequent cycles of formative classroom observation as measured by the Charlotte Danielson Framework rubric using competency 3d Using Assessment Techniques. The baseline data will be the 2017-2018 MOTP average in competency 3d which was 2.93. By February half of teachers will show a 5% increase over this baseline score of 2.93 which means their MOTP rating in competency 3d will minimally be 3.08. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Growth will be measured by Principal Performance Observation feedback in are 3.1 Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. DTSDE Findings 2.2 In reviewing our 2017-2018 ELA state assessment data we found that tour grade 3 and 5 students performed below the citywide average in Writing to Sources. Strengths: Overall our school had a 7% increase in students who were proficient and 51% of our current grade 5 students are proficient in the New York State ELA Exam. Needs: Support the continued implementation of a new ELA curriculum that incorporates a Balanced Literacy Approach will address the the needs of our students who are not meeting expectations in Writing to Sources Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all grade teams will engage in implementation of a rigorous CCLS aligned Writing curriculum will result in a 5% increase in the number of students performing at levels 3 & 4 as measured by the New York City ELA Writing Performance Task. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Programs/Professional Development/Systems and Structures: 1. Planning and professional development for classroom teachers in Benchmark Education Reading and Writing during the month of August. All Students September 2018-June 2019 2. Implementation of Benchmark Education Reading and Writing Workshop with time for small group instruction and conferences with students. 3. Inter visitations for teachers to see best practices in the Benchmark Education Writer's Workshop. 4. Unpacking and planning of the Benchmark Education Reading and Writing Units 5. Use of ULIT Coach, Peer Collaborative Teacher, New Teacher Center Trained Mentors to Facilitate Lab Sites and Intervisitations. Point Persons: 1. Administration and Staff Developer 2. Administration 3. Administration 4. Administration and Staff Developer 5. Administration, ULIT Coach, Peer Collaborative Teacher, New Teacher Center Trained Mentors Implementers: 1. All Classroom Teachers 2. Benchmark Education Point person on each grade level. 3. All Classroom Teachers 4. All Classroom Teachers 5. All Classroom Teachers 3  Subgroups: The sub groups of students who will be impacted by this goal are: ENL students, students with disabilities, and Black and Hispanic males. . Tier 2 Students in Grades K-5 September 2018-June 2019 Point Persons: Administration, ULIT Coach, Peer Collaborative Teacher, New Teacher Center Trained Mentors Implementers: All Classroom Teachers All Students September 2018-June 2019 Administration. RTI Teachers and Parent Coordinator Parent Engagement: Parents of students who are identified in need of AIS services will receive a letter indicating the reason why their child will be receiving services. On an ongoing basis after major in class assessments, classroom teachers will send home Assessment Notification Forms. These forms will inform the parents how their child performed and areas in which the parents can help support their child. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. At the start of the school year and then monthly at PTA meetings families will be kept aware of the leadership opportunities at PS 189 and how their voice can be heard. In addition the SLT and principal will report potential changes that will take place in the school. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Substitue coverage to allow for inter-visitations and lesson studies. Purchasing the Benchmark Education Reading and Writing Units of Study and All related resources Aligning the school schedule to consist of multiple common planning periods weekly for all grades. Purchase of Additional PD days from Benchmark education to focus on Word work and phonics Substitute coverage for Peer Collaborative Teacher and New Teacher Center Mentors to attend professional development Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP X Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 4  C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By March 2019 there will be an increase of minimally 2.5% of students who will be attaining levels 3 & 4 comparing their Beginning of the year NYC Performance Task to their mid-year NYC Performance Task . This will be scored using the NYC Performance Task Rubric . Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by measuring students writing growth comparing their Beginning of the year NYC Performance Task to their mid-year NYC Performance Task . This will be scored using the NYC Performance Task Rubric . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Data Sources: The data source is the 2017-2018 School Quality Guide. Strengths: Have a core of parents who come in for all school events. Have an easily accessible school website, Have a smart phone app that allows for frequent communication between the school and families. Families overall rated us 90% or better in most areas of the School Quality Guide section Strong Family-Community Ties. In addition in looking at our overall score in Strong Family-Community Ties we exceeded the expected score. Needs: More opportunities where parents/guardians have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 10 percent increase in the number of parents who respond “Often or Sometimes” on the Learning Environment Survey Question “Since the beginning of the school year parents/guardians have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a)." 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Point Persons: Administration, Parent Coordinator, PTA President and Professional Development Team Implementers All teaching Staff Parent Engagement: Create a Father's Group All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Begining on Father's Bring your child to School Day have a monthly workshop series for the fathers ion the school. Parent Workshop Series: Create a yearlong series of parent workshops which will focus on preparing children for college, career and success in life after high school. The workshop topics will be: Common Core aligned ELA and Mathematics curriculum; Explorations in Science and our Science Fair; Common Core Aligned Assessments and the PARCC Assessments; Living a Healthy Life; Preparation for Middle School; Financial Planning and Supporting Parenting Skills; Career Training and Resume Writing for Parents Monthly Parent Workshops around Cloud9 world Book of the Month Initiative, Tuesday Parent Engagement Time: Use our “Tuesday Parent Engagement Time” to have teachers invite parents in for curriculum based workshops. During these workshops teachers will share the upcoming unit expectations for students. Teachers will also share strategies with parents on how they can help their children at home Parent Engagement: Parent Workshop Series: All Parents September 2018-June 2019 Create a yearlong series of parent workshops which will focus on preparing children for college, career and success in life after high school. The workshop topics will be: Common Core aligned ELA and Mathematics curriculum; Explorations in Science and Point Persons: Administration, Parent Coordinator, PTA President and Professional Development Team 7 our Science Fair; Common Core Aligned Assessments and the PARCC Assessments; Living a Healthy Life; Preparation for Middle School; Financial Planning and Supporting Parenting Skills; Career Training and Resume Writing for Parents Tuesday Parent Engagement Time: Use our “Tuesday Parent Engagement Time” to have teachers invite parents in for curriculum based workshops. During these workshops teachers will share the upcoming unit expectations for students. Teachers will also share strategies with parents on how they can help their children at home. Sub-Groups: For this goal all sub-groups will be addressed since it encompasses all students Implementers All teaching Staff All Students September 2018-June 2019 Point Persons: Administration and All Teachers Implementers Classroom Teachers and Students 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. We are partnered with a school mental health consultant through Thrive NYC :George Ramos, Sports and Arts After school Programming, Life Space Crisis Intervention and Leak Watts. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will use our Priority and Focus Funding for the following: Substitute Teacher Coverage Professional Development Planning Fair Student Funding will be used for: Incentives for parents who come in and support our school at various events. Food and beverages for the adults who come in to the school to present for our students on career day Other Resources used: Schedule adjustments to allow each grade equitable time using the laptop carts, for the parent workshops we will need to purchase general supplies and ensure we have food and refreshments for the parents 8  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP X Title I TA 21st Century Grant SIG Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. During the March Parent Teacher Conferences Families will be asked to respond to the following survey question : “Since the beginning of the school year parents/guardians have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time to support their school (for example, spent time helping in classrooms, helped with school-wide events, etc.) sometimes or often. (Q4a)." By March 2019 there will be minimally a 5% increase in families who respond agree or strongly agree to the above statement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. During the month of March we will have an online survey for parents to take where they will be asked to respond to the following statement: Since the beginning of the school year you have been asked or had the opportunity to volunteer time at this school.” Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) BaselIneELAand MAth Assessments and State Exam Scores Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Fundations, Wilson, LLI, Extended time/Wait time, Small Group, 10:1, 6:1 or 3:10 These services are provided during and after the school day. Strategic seating, Differentiated instructional practices, Scaffolding, Flexible grouping, Writers’ workshops, Guided Reading Technology Integration, Individual feedback, Multisensory reading instruction, Flexible schedule, Supplemental reading/writing, More intensive schedule/class change, Use of 0  Mathematics BaselIneELAand MAth Assessments and State Exam Scores graphic organizers and checklists in writing, Use tracking strategies for reading (ruler/finger/window) Provide templates for written work, Use word retrieval prompts / word banks Use of Tiered Instruction from Go Math Program, Extended time/Wait time, Strategic seating, Differentiated instructional practices, Scaffolding, Flexible grouping, Technology integration, Individual feedback, Pre-teach/re-teach content and vocabulary, Use flexible groupings Provide review/lesson closure, Small Group, 10:1, 6:1 or 3:10 These services are provided during and after the school day. 1  Science In School Assessments Social Studies In School Assessments At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Pupil Personnel team referrals Use manipulatives and models Use memory strategies Extended time/Wait time, Strategic seating, Differentiated instructional practices, Scaffolding, Flexible grouping, Provide review / lesson closure Use manipulatives and models Use memory strategies Extended time/Wait time, Strategic seating, Differentiated instructional practices, Scaffolding, Flexible grouping, Provide review / lesson closure and models Use memory strategies School Psychologist SAT Team Social Workers Small Group During School Small Group During School Small Group or 1:1 During School 2  3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently in ATS we have 11 students who are in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We conduct a needs assessments with the families which includes: school supplies, uniforms and after school care Students receive at-risk counseling and are first priority for AIS services. We have support in place for the families since attendance is usually a concern. Our school attendance team creates an attendance plan for STH students with attendance below 90%. This plan is shared with the parent/guardian and we work to support them through the plan. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment : We have created a hiring committee that screens and interviews all potential candidates. This committee has created a series of questions that all potential candidates must answer on an in school interview. The candidate’s answers are scored using a rubric. Then candidates with the highest scores are invited back for a second round of interviews and a meeting with the grade level team the vacancy is on. Once this part of the interview process is complete the committee makes their recommendation to the principal. Retention: We have several structures in place to retain staff once they are in our building. ● Common Planning on grade levels daily, ● Grade Leader positions, which provide an opportunity for staff members to take leadership roles in the school ● Professional Development survey at the start of the year so all staff has a say in the workshops they will attend whether provided centrally by the Department of Education, by the UFT Teacher Center, by our Network Support or by other professional organizations. ● Twice a year in-house school survey in addition to the once a year DOE survey so their voices are heard ● During two faculty conferences each year there are open sessions with administration so staff may ask questions and voice concerns Assignments: On a yearly basis staff members are given preference sheets to indicate which grade(s) they would like to teach the following school year. Administration gives all staff members including paraprofessionals the opportunity to discuss 6  the selections they have made. In addition, teaching staff provides input on the cluster positions and so are the options for the professional assignment. High Quality Professional Development: To ensure that our staff becomes highly qualified, we will provide ongoing professional development within the building and set aside funds for staff that will need to continue their post-bachelor work. Within the building we have a UFT Teacher Center, which provides ongoing professional development for all staff. The staff developer has sessions during the school day and after school that aligns to the school’s yearly Professional Development Plan. Another area of professional development comes through our CFN. Our CFN is providing professional development in the following areas this year: Common Core Aligned ELA and Math Instruction, ELL Support, RTI and PBIS. Staff members who attend out of school professional development are required to take notes and upon return to the school, share their notes and resources from the professional development session with their supervisor who will coordinate distribution of the information to all staff 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Principals: The principal attends ongoing professional development offered by the companies who designed the CCLS aligned curriculum which the school has adopted. In addition this is supported through bimonthly professional development offered through the Network. Teachers: To ensure that our staff becomes highly qualified we will provide ongoing professional development within the building and set aside funds for staff that will need to continue their post-bachelor work. Within the building we have a Peer Collaborative Teacher, ULIT Coach, 2- New Teacher Center Trained Mentors, 2- NYC Trained Mentors and a LEAP Apprentice, who will provide ongoing professional development for all staff. The team has sessions during the school day and after school that aligns to the school’s yearly Professional Development Plan. Another area of professional development comes through our BFSC. Our BFSC is providing professional development in the following areas this year: Common Core Aligned ELA and Math Instruction, ELL Support, RTI and PBIS. Staff members who attend out of school professional development are required to take notes and upon return to the school, share their notes and resources from the professional development with their supervisor who will coordinate distribution of the information to all staff. In addition, at the start of the school year staff set goals and are given a PD survey. Based upon goals and the survey, staff members are assigned to Network offered professional development. These plans are adjusted over the course of the school year based upon the observation and feedback cycle. Paraprofessionals; The school has reached out to the network to provide a professional development series tailored to the needs of the paraprofessionals and ensuring that they are trained in strategies that will help them provide access to the curriculum 7  for the students they serve. Theses session will be held on Monday afternoons and after the initial 4 sessions a survey will be given to provide individual PD plans. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. We are not a Targeted Assistance School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). We are not a Targeted Assistance School Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Our Pre-K program has adopted a CCLS aligned curriculum which will prepare the students for the Elementary School Program. In addition, on a monthly basis we have parent workshops where the parents are engaged in activities based upon the curriculum or other topics which are needed by the families. We also have a Kindergarten Open House which all of the families will be invited to. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. As part of the Instructional Focus Collaborative we will be engaged in professional development on the use of assessment to drive instruction. We have provided teachers with many assessment options: conferencing, exit slips, pre, mid and end of unit assessments as well as interim assessments. During their common planning, the teachers decide which assessments are the best to use for their current curriculum unit. This decision is based upon the needs of their class and the curriculum being used. In addition we have created a Math Assessment team which will be creating and aligning the Math assessments which our school uses to each grade’s Common Core Standards. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide 8  plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 321,040.00 70,846.00 0 0 2,270,024.00 x x x Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 5a,5b,5c,5d,5e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 9  2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. PS 189 X The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students PS 189 X The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) PS 189 X The Cornerstone Academy for Social Action,], in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and 3  support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 4  ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 5  II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 6  ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Cornerstone Academy for Social Actions Borough Bronx School Number 189 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal James Bellon Coach Stefanie Pestone ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Evelyn Figueroa Teacher/Subject Area type here Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider type here Superintendent Meisha Ross-Porter Assistant Principal Andrea Tucci Coach type here School Counselor type here Parent type here Parent Coordinator Marjorie Austin Field Support Center Staff Member Kristy Dela Cruz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 361 8 Total number of ELLs 19 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 5.26%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 K 0 3 0 4 0 1 0 2 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 0 6 0 7 0 8 0 9 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The following formative assessments will be used to guide instruction and measure growth in our ELLs: Reading: Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessment Kits (F&P), Easy CBM, Writing: Teacher’s College Writing, Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) tasks, teacher created rubrics, Math: Easy CBM, MOSL. Classroom teachers will use running, records, writing tasks, and pre and post math assessments to guide instruction. We will also use the ELL Assessment Kit to measure Speaking and Listening to ensure that our ELLs are assessed and progress is monitored in all 4 modalities. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? All assessments will be administered by classroom teachers with the support of the ENL teacher. Both teachers will discuss the data collected about the students during a common planning time to address next steps for students 9  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? F & P, Easy CBM, TC Writing, and MOSL tasks will serve as summative assessments and will be administered tri-annually (beginning, middle, end) by either the classroom teacher or the ENL teacher to monitor progress. We will also include data collected from the state exams to address student needs 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ? 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the RTI framework by using the data collected from various assessments and collaboratively working together (teachers, administrators, and service providers) to create an instructional plan for our linguistically diverse student. Within the classroom, students are provided with scaffolding and ENL methodologies to access the curriculum and are also placed in targeted small groups based on their needs. All ELL students also use Imagine Learning, a computer based literacy program to support their language development. Students who continue to struggle are provided with additional support, such as: 0 and 9th period focused RTI groups and/or targeted small group instruction outside of the classroom for example Fundations groups, Wilson groups and LLI groups (are we still doing this). When ELL students continue to struggle or demonstrate persistent difficulties and challenges despite high quality instructional supports and interventions, the student is presented to our Pupil Personnel Team for further targeted supports and/or special education evaluation 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. We use the data collected from the NYSESLAT, ELL Data Analysis tool, and the RLAT as well as a variety of other assessment results both informal and formal to evaluate and inform our program for our ELLs. Our ENL coordinator/teacher uses the data to discuss and address students’ individual needs with in the integrated setting, small group, or standalone focusing on the 4 modalities of language development. Based on the data collected we noticed students increased within the proficiency level, and increased one level. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The structures that are in place to disseminate these findings are collaborative conversations during common planning times, Instructional Cabinet meetings, and Inquiry team meetings. During these times our ENL coordinator/teacher shares the information with teachers, administrators, and service providers (when available) to develop a plan support the students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. In an effort to provide our ELL students with the required amount of English as a new language (ENL) instructional minutes as per CR Part 154.2 our school is following an intergrated/standalone model. Our certified ENL teacher services our students according to the mandated minutes as per CR Part 154.2: Entering students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction 180 of those minutes within a standalone model, Emerging students also receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction , and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of additional supports intergrated in 0  their ELA instruction from the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher uses ENL methodologies, best practices, and the Common Core Learning Standards to plan, support and deliver instruction. b. TBE program. If applicable. n/a c. DL program. If applicable. n/a 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Our certified ENL teacher services our students according to the mandated minutes as per CR Part 154.2: Entering students receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction 180 of those minutes within a standalone model, Emerging students also receive 360 minutes of ENL instruction, Transitioning students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction , and Expanding students receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction. Commanding students receive 90 minutes per week of additional supports intergrated in their ELA instruction from the ENL teacher. The ENL teacher uses ENL methodologies, best practices, and the Common Core Learning Standards to plan, support and deliver instruction. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Content areas are delivered in English using best practices, and ENL methodologies throughout the day and when possible. Our school is currently using the Teachers College Curriculum in conjuction with a school developed curriculum for grades K-2 and Expeditionary Learning Literacy Curriculum for grades 3-5. These curriculums have instructional components to support ELLs. Both curriculums are comprehensively taught with Science and Social Studies infused in the content. In collaboration with the classroom teachers, the ENL teacher supports curriculum and instruction by reviewing and reinforcing content using ENL methodologies. A variety of ENL methodologies and instructional strategies are used including Total Physical Response (TPR), the Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA), and the Language Experience Approach (LEA) to make the learning accessible to our ELLs. In the classrooms, instruction is scaffolded and differentiated for ELLs. The materials used to support language acquisition, vocabulary development, higher order thinking skills, and to make the content accessible to ELLs at all proficiency level are visuals, realia, graphic organizers, technology (lessons, games, video clips), intervention programs such as Fundations for phonics, Imagine Learning, bilingual dictionary, and thesauruses and glossaries for math and science. Native language supports are also provided on an as need basis. Our ENL also uses the language progressions to support students in accessing the language needed to engage with the content. During the standalone small groups the ENL teacher uses the language progressions, the data collected on each student and the curriculums used in the classroom to support the implementation and delivery of instruction and to make the content accessible for the students while supporting them in achieving Common Core Learning Standards.Our school is currently using the Engage NY and Exemplars for math in grades K-5. This program supports our ELLs learning in that it follows the hands on approach, incorporates graphic organizers, manipulatives, and visuals to understand vocabulary and content. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native language when possible. Our ELLs are able to take the Spanish LAB and to take the state mathematics exam in Spanish. Translators are available to support our students who speak languages other Spanish during the state math and science exam. Spanish speaking students have access to literature books, math materials, bilingual dictionaries, and content area vocabulary glossaries when being assessed on local and state levels. ELLs who speak languages other than spanish have access to bilingual dictionaries, and content area vocabulary glossaries as well. We provide our students with translators when necessary. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? 1  SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We differentiate instruction for ELL subgroups. We strive to ensure that each child's individual needs are met. a. As of yet we have not had SIFE students at our school, but in the event that we do have SIFE students that enter our school we will provide them with in classroom support from the ENL teacher and other available providers. After assessing the student should he/she require additional supports we will plan accordingly. b. Our ENL teacher provides our newcomers students with in classroom supports via planning with the classroom teacher, targeted small group instruction and the use of the Imagine Learning program. Lessons are made comprehensible with the infusion of realia, visuals, picture dictionaries, content glossaries, scaffolding strategies, computers, small group instruction, and individualized support. c. ELLs receiving service for 4-6 years receive in classroom supports from the ENL teacher similar to that of the newcomers. ELL students are provided with small group instruction that consist of guided reading/ strategy groups, word study, and writing in literacy and scaffolded math support that incorporate supplemental math materials. Students also participate in targeted small groups during extended day. d. As of yet we have not had long terms ELLs but in the event that we do have them in our school we will provide them with in classroom support, and AIS. After assessing the student should he/she require additional supports we will plan accordingly. e. ELL students that have reached proficiency on the NYSESLAT are provided with in classroom supports from the classroom teacher and ENL teacher, and continue to work on the Imagine Learning program. They participate in small groups and are grouped according to their needs. Additionally they are provide with test modifications for the remiaining 2 years . 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The classroom teacher, the special education teachers, and the ENL teacher work together to ensure that the educational needs of these students are addressed both in terms of their goals in their IEPs and goals set and based on NYSITELL and/or NYSESLAT results. Instruction is scaffolded and differentiated with the support of the ENL teacher (ENL- integrated model). Teachers model strategies and skills for reading and writing through mini lessons using strategies such as: think-alouds, KWL charts, graphic organizers, think-pair-share to build schema, and accountable talk prompts. Vocabulary is introduced and supported through pictures and realia when texts are previewed. Wilson Fundations is also used to provide students with explicit targeted phonics instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? We use curricular, instructional, and scheduling to meet the diverse needs of ELL-SWD by providing small group instruction, differentiation and using ENL strategies to enhance their learning. We use the integrated model to services the ELLs; the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher and special providers to address the students needs. ELL-SWDs have multiple opportunities to spend time with non-disabled peers. During the school day all students participate in lunch time and recess together depending on the grade level. ELL-SWDs are invited to the Sports and Arts After School program and our school's Academic After School Program. They are also invited to participate in our school's extra curricular activities such as: field day, our school's valentine dance, and game night as well as other school events 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Intervention programs for ELLs are offered during the school day, 0 and 9 th period, and after school in English. The programs include: Wilson for students in grades 3-5, Fundations in grades K-2, and Fountas and Pinnell Leveled Literacy Intervention. ELL students who are identified “at risk” receive small group instruction based on their needs. All ELL students in grades 3-5 are invited to attend our after school program whose focus is academic intervention in literacy and 2  mathematics. The after school program is taught by our certified ESL teacher and common branch teachers who plan collaboratively to ensure that ELL strategies are being used throughout the lessons to support the ELL students in their small groups. ELL students participate in these programs based on their results on the NYSESLAT, State Exams and classroom assessments IS THIS STILL TRUE 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? ? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All Ells are invited to attend our afterschool programs and to support them we hire a teacher with either and ENL licensed teacher to work with them while in the program 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials we use to support our ELLs are technology, textbooks, workbooks, dictionaries in their native language (when possible), thesaurus, manipulatives, and visuals. The classroom teachers through the use of laptops/ desktops and Smartboards integrate technology into all classroom instruction. ELLs also use technology to support them with literacy, math practice, and to create reports. We have both a music teacher and a science teacher whose subject areas allow for ELLs to participate fully in projects and produce products with their English speaking peers while developing academic vocabulary that connects to these and other content areas at the same time. All students participate in our physical education instruction, which incorporate TPR and peer supports. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Spanish speaking students have access to literature books, math materials used in Go Math, bilingual dictionaries, and content area vocabulary glosseries. ELLs who speak languages other than spanish have access to bilingual dictionaries, and content area vocabulary glosseries. When possible students are paired with others peers who speak their native language. Our ENL teacher also provided native language supports to our Spanish speakers when necessary. We provide our ELLs whose home language is Spanish with the Spanish LAB as a form of assessment. It is administered by our ENL teacher who is bilingual. Based on the results resources are then provided for the students. Home language supports are provided to the student to support accessing the content 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All required support services, materials, and resources correspond to students' age and grade level. In each classroom there are leveled libraries to meet the needs of all students (beginner to proficient). We also provide students especially new admits with desktop dictionaries in their native language if available for clarification during lessons. Laptops carts are available per grade for students to use laptops to support them with accessing and clarifying the content vocabulary 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our ENL coordinator and our parent coordinator reach out to the family to see what needs they may have. The families are then invited in to the school for a orientation where they can have questions and/or concerns addressed. Families are also invited to our annual summer picnic at the end of August to meet school staff. Here families also have the opportunity to ask 3  questions (translations are available) For the first time we have a full time guidance counselor and part of her role will be to support these students and families as they transition to our school community. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? n/a 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? n/a Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? We provide professional development throughout the school year for our personnel in-house, as well as outside of the school. These professional development sessions are carried out through the school year for ENL coordinator, all teachers, general education, special education, guidance counselor, secretaries, and the parent coordinator. The professional development will be differentiated as needed, focusing on our population and their strengths and weaknesses. We monitor our data closely in order to provide better instruction and opportunities for our staff to grow as professionals. This year we will be dedicating a few of our professional development Mondays to topics with a focus on ELLs. Topics we are looking to discuss are the new ELL mandates, Oral language development and literacy development. The ENL teacher continues to work collaboratively with the classroom teachers who attends professional development opportunities around the Common Core Learning Standards and new curriculums which were developed around the standards, and turnkey the information as needed during common planning times, and through professional conversations. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Through professional development opportunities offered in-house and off site to all our teachers to ensure that our teachers meet their required professional development hours this includes our ENL teacher. All teachers attending these professional developments keep agendas, materials provided and an ongoing log of their hours. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? 4  ENL teachers will have annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs during the time set aside for parent engagement on Tuesday afternoons throughout the school year. ENL teachers will discuss student progress as well as assessment results. These meetings will be offered in the language preferred by the family. If families prefer Spanish our ENL teacher will offer the meeting in Spanish. If it is a language other than Spanish the Interpretation and Translation unit will be contacted for support. We will be keeping records of our meeting and/or phone calls by using call logs and sign in sheets that will be kept in the ELL documentation binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. All school related information is disseminated to the parents of ELL students in English and their Native language when possible. In addition whenever there are meetings within the building we have staff members present to translate and if they are not available we reach out to the Intrepretation and Translation Unit to ensure that the Parents of our ELL students receive the information in the language they are most comfortable with. We have many activities scheduled throughout the school year that we include and extend an invitation to all our families such as: the Family Picnic in August, Back to School Night, school assemblies, evening events at schools, parent- teacher conferences, Parent-Teacher Association meetings and parents workshop on different topics that include fun crafts and academic support. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, James Bellon, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Cornerstone Academy for Social School DBN: 11x189 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) James Bellon Title Principal Andrea Tucci Assistant Principal Majorie Austin Parent Coordinator Evelyn Figueroa ENL/Bilingual Teacher Thea Krumme Meisha Ross-Porter Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 9/15/15 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11x189 School Name: Cornerstone Academy for Social Acti Superintendent: Meisha Ross-Por The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. An intake interview is conducted with each family during student registration at the beginning of the school year. During this interview, parents fill out the Home Language Identification Survey. The HLIS indicates the languages spoken at home and which language(s) parents prefer to receive notifications. This helps us to determine how best to serve the students and families of our community. It also allows us to gather information about the translation needs of our families. Our ENL coordinator/ teacher and our Parent Coordinator continue to communicate with families of students already enrolled to ensure up-to-date information regarding translation needs. Student Emergency Contact cards are available in English and Spanish. Monthly calendars are sent home to maintain the school-home connection. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language As of now parents prefer the following languages: English, Spanish, French 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families All letters to parents, the NYC DOE Citywide Behavioral Expectations,family handbooks, permission slips for trips and afterschool programs, event flyers, event invitations, class newsletters, monthly school calendars, and Robo call communications are sent in home in both English and Spanish How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to 3 Parent-Teacher Conferences, 1 back to school night, Tuesday parent engagement sessions, monthly parent workshops monthly Citizen of the provide interpretation service(s)? 9  Month breakfast events, disciplinary conferences, attendance meetings, all IEP meetings, guidance counselor meetings with parents, and daily parent conversations with parents and families 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities, which includes information regarding translation and interpretation services, will be distributed to families. In addition, signs notifying parents of translation services will be posted prominently in the main office, security desk, the parent information bulletuin board and in the parent coordinator's room. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will use survey monkey to generate online surveys for our families. These surveys will be given to families in November, February and June. 0 
