 10X213 School Name: BRONX ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY ACADEMY Principal: VIJAYALAKSHIMI MONTGOMERY-GILES   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy 321000011213 9-12 School Number (DBN): 10x213 99 Terrace View Avenue Bronx New York 10463 718-563-6678 Phone Number: 718-817-7698 Fax: Dr. Vijayalakshimi Montgomery-Giles VMontgomeryGiles@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Dr. Vijayalakshimi Montgomery-Giles Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: Yvonne Reasen Lauanamay Rutherford Leticia Domenech SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: RichardLopez NathalieLopez Latique Smith N/a Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: Phone Number: Tel: (718) 923-5124 District Information Richard Cintron Superintendent: Superintendent of AffinitySchools 335 Adams Street Brooklyn, NY 11201 Rcintron@schools.nyc.gov (718) 923-5145 Fax:   Field Support Center (FSC) Affinity Group FSC Alexandra Anormaliza FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director: 131 Livingston Street Brooklyn NY 11201 aanorma@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-935-5618 Phone Number: 718-935-2246 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Dr. Vijayalakshimi Montgomery-Giles Yvonne Reasen Launamay Rutherford Martha Bracero Richard Lopez/Parent Natalie Lopez Latique Smith Kimberly Jones-Murphy Sonia Nasser *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Title 1 Representative Member/UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Andrea Smith Leticia Domenech Andrea Smith Monica James Fatima Brown Abigail Oliveras Nereida Michel Member/parent Member/ teacher Member/ co-president/parent Member/Teacher Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/Parent Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Bronx Engineering and Academy (BETA) learning community has the high expectation to improve college readiness standards for ALL students. Teachers will coordinate and deliver data-driven instruction, while administrators will coordinate and deliver data-driven leadership as evidences by creating a culture of continuous improvement that will identify, assess, create, and use benchmark assessments to inform instruction. Our mission is to close the gap in academic achievement on the Common Core English Language Arts and Algebra One Regents for two sub-groups: students with disabilities, and (SWD) and students learning English as a New Language (ENL).   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. 1. Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy (BETA) founded in 2004 is located on the Kennedy Campus with six other schools including two charter schools. With a population of approximately 400 students: 83% male, 17% female, BETA faces unique challenges and has achieved great accomplishments. 2. BETA is proud to be a National Academy Foundation (NAF) school with an Academy of Engineering and an Academy of Information Technology. Our Engineering and Technology programs fostered internship partners for the 2017-2018 year including: Tech-Bridge, Code Interactive, Build, Architecture-Construction-Engineering (ACE), and National Society for Black Engineers (NSBE). Our NAF Board of Directors also includes partners from Pace University, Manhattan College, Code Interactive, Pencil, and NAF. Seventy-five percent (75%) of our 2018 seniors graduated with CTE-endorsed diplomas. Building, maintaining, and fostering these partnerships to provide internships, both paid and unpaid, as well as opportunities for exposure to college and career readiness experiences, both out in the field as well as in the classroom, has been a great challenge and success. Our primary support organization is our Affinity group, New Visions for Public Schools (NV). We are currently involved in multiple NVPS programs to support our curriculum: Global Studies, Algebra, and Living Environment Studies. These programs combined with AP classes, College Access for All, and courses offered at Lehman College through the College Now program support BETA’s vision of College and Career Readiness for All initiatives. In addition, BETA also applied for a CTE endorsement approval along with re-approval for our Engineering Program during the 2017-2018 school year which is currently pending an anticipated approval for the 2018-2019 academic school year. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. BETA is a fully inclusive public high school serving all Students in the general education classroom with the supports of co-teaching as well as push-in and pull-out services for English as a New Language (ENL) and students with special needs (SWD). With 25% of the population receiving special education services and 24% of the population receiving ENL services, making sure all student needs are met within the general education classroom remains a challenge and this year a top priority. Subgroups: Students with special needs (SWD) and English as a New Language (ENL) continue to struggle to achieve College Readiness: >= 70% for the Common Core Algebra 1 Regents and >= 75% for the Common Core English Language Arts exams. Based on the January and June 2018 NYSED Regents data analysis:  SWD average scores were as follow: Algebra 1 - 54% (Jan) and 49% (June) & ELA - 46% (Jan) and 40% (June) Additionally, only 17% of SWD achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that students in the SWD sub-group were absent: Algebra 1 - 15% (Jan) and 33% (June) & ELA - 46% (Jan) and 40% (June).  ENL average scores were as follow: Algebra 1 - 49% (Jan)) and 47% (June) & ELA - 54% (Jan) and 47% (June) Additionally, only 7% of ENL sub-group achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that sub-group of ENL students were absent: Algebra 1 - 11% (Jan) and 30% (June) & ELA - 1% in June 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. COLLABORATIVE TEACHERS:  Teachers had common planning periods school-wide during 7th period. EFFECTIVE SCHOOL LEADERSHIP: 0   Implemented a meeting protocol (spreadsheet) via live Google Docs to monitor meetings during common planning periods. STRONG FAMILY-COMMUNITY TIES:  Winning the city- wide BUILD competition second year in a row!  Awarded the ACE paid internship program for 27 students; two students received college scholarships.  Six (6) students received paid internships with prestigious companies (Con Edison and MTA). TRUST:  Professional Development training “Circles for Support” for teachers and school administrators. For the 2018 - 2019 school year, we would like to focus on: Element #2: Supportive Environment. Which the school establishes a classroom and school culture where ALL students feel safe, supported and challenged by their teachers and peers, with a priority focus on students with special needs (SWD) and English as a New Language (ENL). This will entail: (1) implementation of common planning periods for all common core departments (2) benchmark assessments, (3) data-driven leadership and instruction with the goal to increase College Readiness for all students. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X213 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 399 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 5 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 24 21 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 91.0% % Attendance Rate 87.0% % Reduced Lunch 15.8% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.3% 63.4% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 0.34 0% 8% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 75% 60% 73.8% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 156 150 16 80.1% 4.3% 26.1% 28.6% 3.0% 2.3% 4 8% 6.1 N/A N/A 65% 62% 76.6% 14% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Superintendent's assessment visit indicated a focus is needed in regard to Quality Indicator 1.2 for 2017-2018. Strengths:  BETA lesson plan is used which supports the Danielson Framework for Teaching as well as the Common Core. Instructional Shifts: Teachers support data based instructional groupings as well as agreed upon accountable talk stems. Teachers have an agreed upon set of writing rubrics used across contents. Needs: Student work products vary across the classroom in level of rigor, especially for SWD and ENL students.   Regents' scores continue to reflect that rigor across contents is uneven with lower average scores in both  Math and ELA as of the Regents results for January and June 2018. Increase in ELA and Algebra I foundational skills for students with disabilities (SWD) and English as a New Language(ENL)  As increase in higher level courses including AP courses is needed to drive the "academic bar" higher. In 2016-217 BETA began work with AP for All which continued for 2017-2018. We are continuing this work for the 2018-2019 school year.  Professional development for staff: Data-driven Instruction, Effective Co-Teaching, and Rigor. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all teachers will plan and provide learning experiences in the ELA classes that will result in one or more work/writing products as evidenced by 5% increase in College Readiness on the ELA Regents examinations. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development Team will create and roll-out multiple sessions around student work products with a focus on analysis of benchmark assessments and data-driven instruction. All Pedagogues All teachers will create an action plan and contribute to the Department action plan using MPPR template to identify and address the needs of ENL and SWD students. All Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/ 2019 9/ 2018- 6/ 2019 Assistant Principals and the PD Team APs and Team Leaders Observation cycles will take place six times a year in connection with the 6 marking periods. Focus will be on data-driven instruction and student engagement. All Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Assistant Principals Common planning periods will be added for core areas and CTE teachers for the 2018-2019 school year. Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 APs and Principal BETA will continue participation in the AP for ALL program. Community 9/ 2018- SLT and Parent Teacher Association (PTA) meetings will inform and empower parents around what effective data-driven instruction looks like, what assessments and results mean, and the progress for academic focus and identified student populations/subgroups at BETA. 6/ 2019 Whole Community 9/2018-6/2019 AP and Team Leaders Principal and Guidance Department 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Saturday Parent Workshops inform families of the Curriculum and Instruction that occurs at BETA to inform and provide updates about: CTE, ENL, SWD, Course catalog and classroom visits for presentations and special events. The School leadership Team (SLT) work is done by the Parent Coordinator, Principal, and UFT Chair in conjunction with the SLT Chairperson. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Title I funds will be used to support books and materials for the newly adopted IXL (Mathematics and ELA), Carnegie Math program, and provide PD and coaching for math and ELA teachers. Support from Affinity to continue the NV Living Environment and Global Curriculum programs, as well as new support with the Algebra and Living Environment curriculum. Contract for Excellence per session is used for these departments to meet and plan with the New Visions coaches for the programs. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will take place in the form of three (3) benchmark assessments in Common Core ELA: Beginning of the Year (BOY - September), Middle of the Year (MOY - February), and End of the Year (EOY - May) assessments. Progress monitoring for the overall CEP will occur in November, February and May. Additionally, data from the January 2019 Regents and Spring mock Regents in May 2019 will be used to analyze student progress toward improving College Readiness for all students in general, and Students With Disabilities (SWD) and English as a New Language (ENL) in specific: November 26: Teachers will engage in professional development to analyze data trends, plan, and monitor progress February 4: Teachers will engage in professional development to analyze data trends, plan, and monitor progress May 6: Teachers will engage in professional development to analyze data trends, plan, and monitor progress Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Common Core ELA and Algebra I Regents analysis: (1) Benchmark Assessments (BOY, MOY, EOY), (2) Mock Regents (May 2019), and (3) January and June Regents (2019). Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The Superintendent's assessment visit indicated a focus is needed in regard to Quality Indicator 1.4. It is recommended to "Strengthen staff teamwork that informs administrative and student support functions in the areas of attendance improvement guidance/advisement." Strengths:  BETA's Table of Organization carries two guidance counselors for the 2018-2019, a Parent Coordinator, and a support of an external Attendance Teacher to support attendance and guidance/advisement. Student Advisory Program continuing for 2018-2019  BETA community approved an advisory period within the school day for the 2018-2019 school day.   Develop and implement an Attendance Plan to increase student attendance during Regents Examinations  Create common planning periods for core area departments (ELA and Math). Needs:  Students with special needs (SWD) and English as a New Language continue to struggle to achieve College Readiness: >= 70% Common Core Algebra 1 Regents, and >=75% for the Common Core English Language Arts exams. Based on the January and June 2018 NYSED Regents Data Analysis:  SWD Average Scores were as follows: Algebra 1 - 54% (Jan) and 49% (June) & ELA 46% (Jan) and 40% (June). Additionally, only 17% of SWD achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that students in the SWD sub-groups were absent: Algebra 1 - 15% (Jan) and 33% (June) & ELA 46% (Jan) and 40% (June).  ENL Average Scores were as follows: Algebra 1 - 49% (Jan) and 47% (June) & ELA 54% (Jan) and 47% (June). Additionally, only 7% of ENL sub-group achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that sub-groups of ENL were absent: Algebra 1 - 11% (Jan) and 30% (June) & ELA 1% (June). Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 6  By June 2019, the student government officers will identify topics and host grade level assemblies relative to creating and maintaining a positive school environment, which will be from November - June, as evidenced by a 10% increase on the Student Survey for Supportive Environment. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? The Guidance Department will roll out the college readiness data for the Advisory Program by Cohort as well as use the College Board Curriculum in small groups. Students 9/2018 - 6/2019 College Access for All Team, AP for All Team, PD Team The BETA staff will meet with their assigned Advisory Cohort every Friday for 25 minutes to provide students with data (academic, attendance, graduation, behavioral, and social-emotional) and guidance supports/plans to self-monitor (students) and support student outcomes (staff). The BETA staff will incorporate honor roll and "On a Roll" standings into their advisory programs with the goal of increasing student achievement and empowerment to proactively self-monitor and make necessary changes over the 2018-2019 school year. . Students 9/2018- Guidance 6/2019 Advisory Team Advisory Staff Students 9/2018- Guidance 6/2019 Department and Attendance Team The ENL and SWD teachers will receive training for classroom instruction for New Vision Curriculum for Algebra I. After-school instructors will be trained in successful integration of an on-line program via IXL, which is a learning website for students to master fundamental, individualized skills online for both ELA and mathematics. Parent meetings specifically developed to support parents, as well as students with special needs (SWD) and English Language Learners (ENL) will take place each term to provide support, collaboration and guidance to families which will be communicated and supported through advisory. BETA will have monthly celebration award assemblies to acknowledge academic achievement and growth, perfect attendance, most improved attendance, and student leadership. The BETA Community 10/2018- 6/2019 Math, ELA and CTE Pedagogues 9/2018- Principal 6/2019 9/2018- Parents 6/2019 SLT: School Leadership Team SIT: School Intervention Team Parent Coordinator Guidance Department COSA Advisor Attendance Team Parent Coordinator 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The COSA Advisor, Parent Coordinator, and Community Coordinator will support the Guidance department in the area of family outreach and collaboration via daily calls for student absences, monthly BETA Blast on the school website, coordination of monthly family events to communicate, update, Learn at Lunch opportunities for/with students, to celebrate student success, which will be facilitated and monitored by school administration. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Fair Student Funding is used to staff pedagogues including guidance department, special education and ELL staff who support the advisories in reading this goal. Additionally, per session funded with Contract For Excellence is used to send teachers to outside professional development. Title I SWP is used to cover teacher absences for teachers who attend outside training in meeting the needs of students with disabilities and ELLs. Contract for Excellence as well as Title I SWP are used for any materials needed to support advisory. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 100% of the students will be scheduled for advisory by 09/2018. Progress monitoring will be done through collection of attendance (weekly) and grade data (each of 6 marking period) by guidance department and Assistant Principal of Operations who is overseeing the program. The New Visions Student Sorter will support the team in using data to target "at risk" students. The goal is for students with 75% attendance and lower to increase their attendance by at least 4% by February and 6% by June 2019. Each student being make aware through advisory of their attendance data and their attendance goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Reports will be run weekly for the attendance meeting. These reports combined with individual student attendance as updated monthly on the New Visions student sorter will be used. Additionally, Skedula will be used where students and parents can access attendance data from home. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy has established key CEP teams/committees:  Grade Level Teams: Guidance and Assistant Principals  Department Teams: Core Areas, CTE, and Guidance  Academic Committees: Advisory, Attendance, Assessment, SIT, and SLT  School Culture Committees: Sunshine, COSA, PD, UFT (Administrators/Staff) BETA has also identified the Problem of Practice (POP) and subgroup priority: Students with special needs (SWD) and English as a New language (ENL) continue to struggle to achieve College Readiness: >=70% for the Common Core Algebra I Regents and >=75% for the Common Core English language Arts exams. Based on the January and June 2018 NYSED Regents data analysis: SWD Average Scores were as follows: Algebra 1 - 54% (Jan) and 49% (June) & ELA 46% (Jan) and 40% (June). Additionally, only 17% of SWD achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that students in the SWD sub-groups were absent: Algebra 1 - 15% (Jan) and 33% (June) & ELA 46% (Jan) and 40% (June).  ENL Average Scores were as follows: Algebra 1 - 49% (Jan) and 47% (June) & ELA 54% (Jan) and 47% (June). Additionally, only 7% of ENL sub-group achieved College Readiness. We also noticed that sub-groups of ENL were absent: Algebra 1 - 11% (Jan) and 30% (June) & ELA 1% (June). Needs:  There needs to improve the co-teaching model for ALL staff.  Common planning periods for core area and ICT teachers to ensure communication and collaboration to support SWD and ENL students.  After-school opportunities to receive internal and external professional development. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 0  By June 2019, all ICT teachers will meet twice a week with ELA and Math teachers to ensure a 5% increase in College Readiness for SWD and ENL students. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Departments and Teams will each meet twice a week throughout the year. Continued editing and revising of Pacing calendars/map alignment will be incorporated as one of the yearly goals for each team and each department. IEP Coordinator and ELL Coordinator as well as all other members of the SIT team will provide support and recommendations/adjustments to the refinement of curriculum and lesson planning for ICT models in response to student data. Team Leaders will be a part of the teacher Leadership Program through the BOE attending monthly workshops and multi-school thought partnerships to increase team productivity and outcomes. The ENL and SWD teachers will receive training for classroom instruction for New Visions Curriculum for Algebra I. After-school instructors will be trained in successful integration of an online program via IXL, which is a learning website for students to master fundamental, individualized skills online for both ELA and mathematics. The BETA staff will incorporate SWD and ENL honor roll and "On a Roll" standings into their advisory program with the goal of increasing student achievement and empowerment to proactively self-monitor and make necessary changes over the 2018-2019 school year. SLT and Parents Association will support in the continued evolution of the BETA course catalog with a focus on (1) ensuring ALL students graduate with four years of mathematics and science, and (2) additional AP courses into the master schedule. Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Assistant Principals Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Assistant Principals and SIT Team Team Leaders 9/2018- 6/2019 Team Leaders and Principal Math, ELA and CTE Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Students 9/2018- 6/2019 Guidance Department and Attendance Team Community 9/2018- 6/2019 Administration/Computer Support Specialist, PTA and Parent Coordinator 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Educating parents on the meaning of, as well as importance of, College Readiness, remains a focus for 2018-2019. Through Parents Nights, Parent Assemblies, Parent Teacher Conferences, Parent Association meetings and workshops, the BETA website as well as email families will be invited by teams and departments to participate in field trips, expositions, and competitions as well as a classroom presentations and performances. Parent Coordinator and AP of Operations will oversee the progress of family engagement in supporting this goal. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. TL Fair Student Funding is used to staff pedagogues. Contract for Excellence per session is used for these departments to meet and plan with the New Visions coaches for any of the curriculum programs to which they are involved. Contract for Excellence as well as Title I SWP are used for any materials needed to support learning. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A SIG X PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The Assistant Principals will be monitoring this work through attending the team and Departments meetings as well as monitoring the work through Google docs. Curriculum revision and vertical alignment will additionally be a part of the Instructional APs goals for the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Department and team notes in Google Docs, Pacing Calendars/Maps, Lesson Plans, a record of actual revisions will be kept by each teacher throughout the year. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Superintendent's assessment visit Indicated a continued focus is needed in regards to Quality Indicator 5.1 : It is recommended to:   "Further develop processes and systems to regularly evaluate and adjust curriculum, instructional, and organizational practices to meet learning needs of students and expectations of the CCLS, College Board, and CTE Standards. Several expectations that are clearly communicated to faculty are not adequately monitored for consistent implementation that affects student outcomes and school culture positively. Strengths:  BETA has a newly implemented Common Planning meetings for core areas and CTE department   Assistant Principals will attend and monitor these meetings, as well as supervise the Teacher Leaders It has been worked into the system for 2018-2019 to hire and support one Model Teacher Needs: The lack of developed structures and protocols for team meetings continue to be a challenge, which resulted in unevenness of Regents scores for students, in which students passed the class, but failed to pass the Regents. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through distributive and true collaborative leadership there will be a 2% increase in student pass rates on Regents examinations. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Principal will meet with Assistant Principals, twice a week, to review MPPR Action Plans to measure CEP progress, data-driven instructional leadership, analyze student data, and classroom observation analysis. Create Table of Organization to build teacher leadership capacity. Assistant Principals will monitor assigned departments, committees, teacher leaders, and team meetings on a monthly basis. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Team and Department Leaders 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principals SIT Committee members will meet weekly to identify, target and develop interventions for SWD and ENL students. Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principals will attend committee meetings to review/revise Department plans as well as give informal feedback weekly. Assistant Principals will conduct at least three observations for all teachers per making period. Teachers will rotate leadership during weekly Team meetings. Assistant Principals Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principals Pedagogues 9/2018- 6/2019 Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. SLT and Parent Association will be made aware of the work being done by teams and departments throughout the year via the Parent and Community Coordinators. School data which is a direct result from this work will also be shared during PD and weekly updates, and monthly BETA Blast document on the school website. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  Human resources will be leveraged to fill these leadership roles as well as instructional resources. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will utilize all meeting agendas, minutes and next steps on google docs. A monthly report will be submitted to the administrative team by the Assistant Principals. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be determined by assessments and NYS Regents examinations scores. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths:  BETA has one Parent Coordinator, and one Community Coordinator  All correspondence to parents are in both English and Spanish Needs Assessment: Parent involvement is 15% for Parent Association meetings and 10% for Parent-Teacher conferences based on attendance sheets. Despite multiple incentives and programs offered, there has been no change in turn out according to Parent and Community Coordinators attendance sheets. In addition, there was no evidence of a family-friendly calendar of events. Multicultural exposure/sensitivity opportunities with parents and students via Saturday Academy Workshops for parents, invitations attend after-school events/trips, Family Nights, and Multicultural events. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019 there will be a 15% increase in parent engagement as evidenced by attendance sheets: Parent Workshops, Multicultural school events, PTA and SLT meetings. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parent Coordinator will continue with email bank and send out email blasts in addition to the already in place phone messenger announcements as well as on the BETA website www.betahs.com Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Parent Coordinator assisted by Community Coordinator PA Meetings will be held on the third Thursday evening of every month. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 SLT Parents will receive surveys and be asked to volunteer in the school to assist in various school activities, such as Multicultural day, College tours, assemblies, guests at Advisory programs, and school celebrations. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 A calendar of events and programs offered throughout the entire school year followed by daily interactions and updates/reminders to students during lunch periods. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 Coordination of ENL/SWD Parent programs offered on the JFK campus included in the 2018-2019 BETA calendar. SWD/ENL Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 JFK Campus Community Parent Coordinator Community Coordinator Parent Coordinator assisted by Community Coordinator Parent Coordinator assisted by Community Coordinator Parent Coordinator assisted by Community Coordinator SWD & ENL Department Monthly workshops, BETA Blast news/messages from school leadership and student councils will be offered and advertised on the BETA Website. The Parent Coordinator will do a needs assessment at every meeting to gather ideas for the next workshop. Parents 9/2018- 6/2019 School Administration Parent Coordinator assisted by Community Coordinator 8  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Columbia Presbyterian Health Center, Kennedy Library, BUILD, as overseen by the Parent Coordinator and AP of Operations. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Tax Levy through hiring of staff that support the programs. Parent involvement funds through Tile I SWP - ELL programs offered will be supported through Title III LEP. Contract for Excellence per session will be used to support teachers and counselors to come out on Saturdays to participate in the PA meetings whenever possible. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will occur through the assessment and record keeping of parent sign in sheets for all parent related activities throughout the year. Parent surveys through survey monkey will be given out twice by the parent coordinator to assess parent needs throughout the year. Additionally, phone messenger records will be assessed to determine the rate at which phone numbers are updated. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Sign-in sheets, parent surveys, and phone messenger records will be used to assess progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Students in the schools lowest third in English according to 8th grade scores periodic assessment given in the fall Algebra Students in the school slowest third in mathematics according to their 8th grade scores Algebra Periodic Assessmentgiven in the fall Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Achieve 3000 English Class Tutoring after school When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the day and after school Transitions to Algebra 9th graders in lowest third will do one year of transitions to algebra program supported by New Visions and then into A2I their second year of Algebra During the school day After school tutoring After school tutoring from the math department twice a week to target students assessed by teachers to be struggling Group Class Tutoring after school During the school day Achieve 3000 after school Science Students in the lowest third New Visions' Living Environment Curriculum Program with coaching and supports 0  Group Class During the school day tutoring after school Achieve 3000 after school During the school day Social Studies Living Environment Periodic Assessment given in the fall Achieve 3000 to support reading and writing Students in the lowest third New Visions' Global Curriculum Program with coaching and supports Global Periodic Assessment in the fall US periodic Assessment given in the fall Students in Crisis At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 1. Restorative Circles one - one and group 2. Crisis Intervention Counseling 2. Peer mediation 3. Respect for All 4. Health Center on Campus has mental health supports 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 5 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies, basic hygiene products, clothing, coats will be made available. After school tutoring with access to computer lab, printing and tech support before and after school. Students will be monitored and checked on by their counselor on a weekly basis to ensure the students are receiving all the support needed. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Our school actively recruits teachers with the help of our Affinity Group, New Visions For Public Schools. New Visions' screens candidates prior to referring them to us for consideration. We also utilize our Affinity Group Human Resource Director to assist in the search for candidates. We also consider candidates who apply through the NYC DOE New Teacher Finder, NYC DOE Open Market system. Our retention is achieved by providing teachers with ongoing support and professional development opportunities including support network PD offerings and professional development offered by some of our external partners including college board and college summit. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development sessions take place in house at least once a month. In these PD sessions teachers turn-key up to date skills and strategies they have learned in outside PDs to support students. Accordance to Jose P laws to ELL teacher supplies professional development to the staff for support of English Language Learners. The Special Education Lead also supplies PD sessions to teachers to expose them to the most up to date skills and strategies to support students with IEPs. Various coaches through New Visions support the Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers and Counselors with professional development coaching in school and sessions outside of school. Additionally coaches come in to support teachers through Code Interactive, College Access for All, Build, Mathematics Carnegie learning. Additional Engineering and Technology Professional Development is provided by CODE Interactive, NAF (National Academy Foundation) and PLTW (Project Lead the Way). Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 4  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers develop marking period performance assessments with the support of their department lesson studies. Other Assessments such as a mock - Regents are developed by the Professional Development Team lead by the UFT chair. PSAT, SAT and Advanced Placement Exams are also coordinated and data shared through the testing coordinator through the PD team. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 328,956 N/A 12,399 N/A 2,717,075 x N/A x N/A x Section 5 a,b,c,d,e N/A Section 5 a,b,c,d,e N/A Section 5 a,b,c,d,e 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program. 6   Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 8  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESEA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1ST of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); 9  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 0  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 1  ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; ● Parent Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 2  ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 3  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Program 1 ENL school day Inclusion Program - no cost to Title III funding 2018- 2019 "Entering" BETA students = 5 "Emerging" BETA students = 7 "Transitioning" BETA students = 16 "Expanding" BETA students = 38 Students receive ENL push-in services in their English classes from the ENL teacher. The Content teacher and English Teacher co-teach the class. When the lesson warrants it the ENL teacher will pull out students for small group or 1:1 support during the "Task" section of the lesson. The ENL teacher's stand alone class is a second English Language class for 19 of the ENL students who have been assessed to need the additional class or must have the hours according to the mandates. Student to teacher ratio varies in each of the 8 push-ins and the one stand alone. Other classes varies from 1 classroom: 1 ENL: 8 or less ENL students Program 2 Title III Funded After School Program Life Time Learner Language Lab: Goal: The Goal of Life - Time Learners Language Lab is to increase the scores in all four language modalities as measured by NYSESLAT by June 2019. Lifetime learners language lab is targeted toward our largest population of ENL: "transitioning" and "expanding" (66 students) ENL students as well as parents who desire to learn or improve their English Language (or another language), although all ENL students are encouraged to attend. Students are in groups of 5 maximum: curriculum and instruction are planned, supported and run by the ENL teacher in collaboration with a Special Education Teacher and an English content teacher. Each group of 5 has a teacher assigned. The ENL teacher may pull a student aside for DI (Direct Instruction) when needed. A Special Education teacher teaches the program with the ENL teacher. Rationale: ENL students struggling with oral and written language needs, as assessed through teacher anecdotal, grades as well as most current NYSESLAT Scores are targeted for this program. Additional assessments may be but are not limited to : Regents scores, grades, periodic assessment, marking period performance assessments and teacher anecdotal records as reported to the SIT team. 5  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Schedule and Duration: Lifetime Learners Language Lab takes place on Thursday after school from 3:00pm - 4:30pm (September - June). The Lifetime Learners Language Lab takes place in a classroom with laptops available to all students. Although targeting "transitioning" and "expanding" students all ENL students are welcome in this program run by the ENL teacher and supported by a special education teacher as well as content English teacher. ENL students as well as ENL parents are welcome and invited to work on the Rosetta Stone Language Program to improve language skills. Conversation and social skills training will also be available during this time. Program 3 Conversational English Class: Every Wednesday 3:00 - 4:30 No cost to Title III Program 4 After School Subject Tutoring: Title III funding ENL and Non-ENL students will be fully integrated into the after school subject support sessions. The ENL teacher as well as Special Education teachers will be supporting the subject teachers in this work. This will take place from October - June dependent on funding. # and Types of Certified Teachers: ENL coordinator (certified ENL) as well as Ms. Jones (Certified Special Education), in addition to content level teachers with support from special education teachers, will be working in small groups as well as 1:1 with ELL within their fully integrated after school sessions. Language of Instruction: Instruction will be in the following majority languages: Spanish and English. The students will be a mix of Entering, Emerging, and Transitioning as tested on the NYSESLAT. Materials: general classroom supplies, computers, headphones, teacher per session Teacher Per Session: 1 ENL teacher : 1x a week Language Lab and 1x a week push in support services to content tutoring teachers 72 sessions: one hour X 52.23 = $3,769.56 1 English Content Teacher 36 sessions of Language Lab 32 x 52.23 = $1,880.28 1 Special Education Teacher 36 sessions of Life time Language Lab 32 x52.23 = $1880.28 14 hours of the ENL teacher attending the Cross-Curricular Grade Team Meetings at least once a marking period after school during PD Monday from 2:40 - 3:50 to support under credited, low attendance and/or struggling ELLs in support of the schools CEP Goal which targets this population through weekly after school CCGT meetings. 14 hours of administrative support was set aside for an administrator to be present for an Assistant Principal to conduct and support Saturday ELL parent support meetings, ELL programming, creating and providing ELL DATA reports for ELLs as well as 1x a week for 36 weeks pushing in to support the departmental efforts, and specific component, as well as to offer support and supervise. 6  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: At no cost to title III funding: Rational: School staff receives at least 80 min of ELL PD twice a year. Teachers who receive training: All Teachers, One to One Paras Teachers to receive the training: All teachers including counseling staff attend the 80 minutes of PD yearly. Duration: Teachers will receive the training turn-keys from the ENL instructor during Monday, after-hours PD time. Topics to be covered: Serving ENL students in your classroom Who are they? How do you get an interpreter when needed? How do you assess the needs of ENL students in your class? How does one differentiate in a lesson plan to meet the needs of the four differentiate levels of ENL students? What are the social emotional needs and concerns of ENL students and how do we ensure these needs are being met? Provider: Ms. Hoppes, ENL Coordinator ENL Instructors: Ms. Leticia Domenech and Ms. Hoppes will also attends PD sessions out of the school building - with no cost to Title III finding. All English Content Teachers as well as the Assistant Principal who observes the ENL teacher may also attend at least one additional out of the building PD to support ENL students at no cost to Title III finding. 7  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Rational: For parents to learn alongside their students and as a community, and for ENL parents to support each other through the high school process. Schedule and Duration: On Thursdays from 3:00 - 4:30 the Lifetime Learners Language Lab is advertising for parents to take part in this learning opportunity with their children taking place in the computer lab. Additionally 2 yearly ENL parent meetings will take place to offer outreach of community service information as well as Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy high school offerings such as : JFK Presbyterian Health Center, Community drug programs as well as all of the after school activities provided at Bronx Engineering and Technology Program, College Supports through our college summit program (including FASFA, SAT prep classes, the college process etc, drug and free mental health and addiction support fro adults and students, free tax services, etc.) Topics to be covered: The students, parents and BETA staff will work on the Rosetta Stone Language Program to improve language instruction. Ms. Hoppes, ENL Coordinator; Ms. Mitchell, Special Education Coordinator; Asst. Principal Doyle, and Principal Dr. Giles, also supporting this work. Language of instruction will be majority English/Spanish. Name of Providers: Ms. Hoppes/Ms. Domenech, Certified ENL Teachers - Various Content Area Pedagogues Notification: Parent Coordinator, Ms. Brice will be sending out phone messages in English and Spanish, email blasts, the BETA Website, BETA Twitter account and mailings. All of these communications will inform parents of the opportunities at BETA to receive ENL services for their children and themselves. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 1 hour 2x a week = 72 sessions teacher per session ENL 72 X 52.23 = $3,769.56 Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1x per week Lifetime learners Language Lab for ENL teacher, English Content Teacher and Special Education Teacher 8 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 1x a week ENL teacher supprts after school tutoring whre ENLs students are fully integrated into the after school tutoring program 14 hours of the ENL teacher attending the Cross-Curricular Grade Team Meetings at least once a marking period after school 50 hours of administrative support 1 English Content Teacher 36 sessions of Language Lab 36 x 52.23 = $1,880.28 1 administrator 36x $56.79 = 2,044 to support the program on Mondays as both supervisor and math/science support 14 x56.79 =795.06 AP Programming of ELLs, collecting DATA reports for ELLS and organizing the administration of ENL Assessment 0 0 Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 1,200 materials that are needed for the program Rosetta Stone Software Licence 0 0 n/a 2,000 0 0 11,200 9  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Bronx Engineering and Technology Academy Borough Bronx School Number 213 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Karalyne Sperling Coach n/a ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Matthew Woods/ENL Teacher Teacher/Subject Area Kim Jones/Special Education Teacher/Subject Area Santonyo Bangali/English Related-Service Provider Idaliz Garcia/COunselor Superintendent Juan Mendez Assistant Principal Richard Dixon Coach n/a School Counselor Dozene Fletcher Parent Richard Lopez Parent Coordinator Margarita Brice Field Support Center Staff Member Samual Rodriguez Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 P 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0  D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 400 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 17.75% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 3 4 K Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Results from NYSESLAT and Achieve 3000 are being used this year. Last year we also used the Gates McGinitie in both the beginning and end of the school year. The ESL teacher uses teacher made assessments to determine reading comprehension. The insights that the Gates, and Achieve provide are reading lexiles. The NYSESLAT gives us the four modalities listening, speaking, writing as well as reading skills. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? One full time ENL teacher, two subject teachers have ENL pending, after school program 1  3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Steady English Language development as measured by the NYSESLAT. Additional marking period grades, conferencing, credit accumulation and regents passing rates are all considered. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We are working with affinity for the 2017 - 2018 school year in providing support and PD to our staff and ENL coordinator on a weekly basis. Additionally, they are supporting us in looking at student work to support instructional decisions. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The 35 ENLs this year range from Entering to Expanding with a few additional ELLs who tested out as commanding but still being serviced by the ENL instructor. Speaking and listening appear to be strengths of our ENL students with the majority needing support in reading and writing with writing being the most challenging modality. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The administrative cabinet meets on a weekly basis to discuss team and department work which includes student work and outcomes. The ENL coordinator rotates between Team and Departments meetings. Additionally, during the Other Professional Work Time on Tuesdays and Monday 80 minute PD time the ENL teacher supports all pedagogues in meeting the needs of ENL students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The ENL teacher pushes into the 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th grade English classes. Additionally, he pushes into the science class for emerging students. All students below proficiency are scheduled for his stand alone English class which meets once a day. b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Mr. Woods schedules each of the 35 students accordingly based on their last NYSESLAT scores to ensure they are receiving their mandated minutes. Entering = 540min 3 units of study 2  Emerging =360min 2 untis of study Transitioning = 180min 1 unit of study Expanding= 180min 1 unit of study Commanding = .5 units or approved method of study 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. All ENL classes are integrated. The content is the same but delivered through scaffolding and integration. The BETA lesson plan is contains a box where ENL and Sped students initials are indicated in each class as well as the supports the teacher and/ or co-teachers have incorporated in the lesson. Materials are not " lowered" neither are expectations for any student. Materials Used: English: Collections Curriculum with multiple supports and teacher made materials Social Studies: New Visions Global Curriculum, US History uses Engage NY, Government and Economics use project based curriculum Math: Transitions to Algebra and A2I curriculum and Engage NY Science uses New Visions curriculum and Engage NY All AP courses use College Board approved curricula Engineering is Project Lead the Way curricula Technology is Code Interactive Curricula Rosetta Stone is used for additional support in the the Life Time learners Language Program All methods and curricula are in alignment with the CCLS. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? If home language evaluation is deemed necessary, an informal evaluation is done through speaker of the native language who is on staff or through translation unit to assess the child's progress. A questionnaire is developed and the process is over seen by the LAPT team. At this time, we have native language speakers of our ENLs on staff. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Each student who is in each subgroup is identified and the data is shared with the pedagogues who work with the students. All students receive their mandated services as well as have a program developed by the SIT team that is shared with the pedagogues that serve the students. These students and their supports are indicated on every lesson plan. a. SIFE: Small group instruction, after school tutoring for language development in the life time learners language lab, translated text if needed, modified assignments if needed b. Newcomer: Translated text, buddied up with student of same language higher proficiency whenever possible, after school Rosetta Stone program c. Developing: bilingual dictionaries, and modification when needed d. Long Term ELLs: Small group break out sessions, buddied with higher proficiency same language learners, assignment modification when necessary, bilingual dictionary available e. Former ELLs: Individualized attention when needed - targeted specifically toward still developing area of need. 3  6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? All materials are grade level with teacher modified differentiation, scaffolding and support: English Achieve 3000 technology and Collections with needed scaffolding a nd support and bi-lingual dictionaries available Math Transitions to Algebra and A2I Algebra w/ Engage New York Algebra, Geometry, Trig and Pre calc Global: CCLS Global w/ support from New Visions Global Curriculum Program US: CCLS US Earth and Living CCLS w/ Living curriculum New Visions program Rosetta Stone Technology used to support language across all four modalities and all subjects. BETA's IEP program is fully inclusive. All students are served in either SETSS or ICT. The Special Education Head/IEP teacher, Ms. Kim Jones, collaborates with Mr. Woods, ESL Coordinator, on a weekly basis in the SIT team meeting. All ESL students with an IEP are overseen by this team's collaboration. Mr. Woods pushes in to multiple ICT English classes a day to serve the ELLs with IEPs. At this time there is no bilingual program nor bilingual IEP ELLs. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? BETA is a full inclusion program both for ESL stduents and IEP students. All classes are heterogeneous. All teachers are supported through PD, BETA lesson framework and team teaching approach. Our after school programs offer additional content support as well as a specific after school Language Lab for ELLs and their parents. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ENL teacher pushes into the classes where the need for that ELLs development is needed most. Additionally the ENL teacher consults with the content area teachers. Twice a year an in house PD is done by the ENL teacher to further support all members of the staff. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We continue to fine-tune the language and content objectives for all ELLs. The ENL teacher attends multiple PDs throughout the year to explore new methods, strategies, materials and supports for Ells. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None at this time. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All Ells are in a fully integrated program. We use a fully integrated ENL approach and students are only pulled out for services when absolutely necessary. A stand alone ENL class is an additional supprt for the entering and emerging students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instructional materials: Rosetta Stone, Achieve 3000, Common Core English Collections Curriculum as provided by the city which include scaffolding and supports for ELLS. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Student pairing of same native language speakers. Translations are made available for entering and emerging students whenever possible. various mediums are used to support instruction: film, audio, visual, writing, reading, drawing, acting etc... 4  14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. CR Part 154 is consulted diligently and cross referenced with the ATS report.: 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The 2017 -2018 school year will be the first year of a shared Affinity support meetings for ENL teachers once a week to share best practices etc...Instructional materials: Rosetta Stone, Achieve 3000, Common Core English Collections Curriculum as provided by the city which include scaffolding and supports for ELLS. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). We have an summer intensive ENL institute which grants an elective English credit. In this institute various mediums are used to support language acquisition. Additionally. the guidance counselor provides one to one support for both the family and student. The Parent Coordinator and ENL teacher have parent meetings and workshops for ENL families throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish elective is offered to all including ENL students. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The ENL teacher attends multiple PDs held by the DOE throughout the year. The ENL teacher turn keys information learned in the outside PDs to the departments and personnel that teach the ELL students. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Middle school ELLs moving into high school have both the 9 th grade orientation as well as are invited to an ELL orientation. All ELLs are encouraged to attend summer school at the high school the summer before their 9 th grade year in our Bridge program. The ENL teacher provides an 80 minute PD twice a year to the entire staff. The ENL teacher attends ELL related PDs throughout the year. Additional staff members attend ELL related PDs. All teachers fill out a PD leave form which is approved by the Principal. The school secretary keeps records throughout the year of all PDs attended by all staff members. (List is available upon request) 5  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Mr. Woods and Ms. Brice - The ENL teacher and Parent Coordinator hold separate ALL parent meetings throughout the year . It is in these meetings that individual meetings are set up . Additionally the school has a guidance counselor for 9 th and 10 th grade students and a guidance counselor for 11 th and 12 th grade students. When the families of ELLs have meetings with the guidance counselor the ENL teacher is a part of these meetings also. 2. All meeting records are kept by the ENL teacher as well as the guidance counselors. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ell parent involvement takes place through both the PTA and SLT where Ell parents are welcome to be a part of the school community. Additionally, parent meetings by cohort, or specific subgroups takes place throughout the year. All parents are invited to the Life Time Learners Language Lab program run by the ENL teacher where Rosetta Stone is offered in multiple languages for parents, students and staff once a week after school. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 6 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Karalyne Sperling, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 7  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 8  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x213 School Name: Bronx Engineering and Technology Ac Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Person Responsible: Parent Coordinator, Margarita Brice 9 th and 10 th Grade Counselor, Dozene Fletcher 11 th and 12 th Grade Counselor, Idilaz Garcia Parent Coordinator, Margarita Brice 9  ATS reports, HLIS forms, Blue Cards and September 2106 cohort parent meetings. Sign-ins in all offices all ask language preferred. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Spanish, Bangali 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Lunch Forms, Health Center Forms, School Calendar, BETA monthly calendar, Letters from Principal, Letter From School Leadership, Letters from the DOE that are sent to be distributed by "backpack". 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to September parent cohort meeting, rqlCurriculum Night, Parent/Teacher Conferences, One to One conferences with administration and counselors and provide interpretation service(s)? 0  teachers throughout the year including disciplinary/counseling interventions. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The yearly parent survey published by the DOE is analyzed by the administrative cabinet for needs that are not being met by the school. Action plans are put in place for the following year Parent Surveys are emailed to the staff by the parent coordinator through survey monkey in December and May. 1 
