 School Name: 09X232 I.S. 232 Principal: DESIREE RESTO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 09X232 Intermediate 320900010232 6-8 1700 Macombs Road Bronx, NY 10453 718-583-7007 Phone Number: 718-583-4864 Fax: Desiree Resto dresto2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Desiree Resto Raymond Cavallo Carmen Lopez Angela DeJesus KatiaLopez N/A N/A District Information Geographical District: 09 Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Superintendent: 1245 Washington Avenue, Bronx, NY 10456 Superintendent’s Office Address: lrosario2@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718) 579-7143 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx (718) 410-7017 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 ZeregaAvenue, Bronx, NY 10462 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Desiree Resto Raymond Cavallo Carmen Lopez Dorothy Ostuni KatiaRodriguez Martha Lopez AdisLopez LakeishaRowe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent   Name Angela DeJesus Linda Berkovitch Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/Teacher/Chairperson Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/Teacher Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? I.S. 232 is dedicated to serving the community by ensuring a safe and nurturing environment while providing our students with the necessary tools and skills to achieve success, as well as creating productive and active citizens in society.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. I.S. 232 is located in the University Heights section of the Bronx. The school thrives in a building that is over ninety years old and in its history, has undergone few cosmetic changes to the original edifice. Today, I.S. 232 does not thrive alone. The building is collocated with C.I.S. 303 and The Academy for Language and Technology. For over ninety years, there has been a clear relationship between the school and the surrounding community. One of the longest standing relationships is that of the school and The Morris Heights Health Center. The health center is located on the second floor and affords students and parents the convenience of a full-service clinic staffed by a physician's assistant, a nurse and a social worker. Additionally, special initiatives offered include extended weekly academic programs to provide students with additional support beyond the regular school hours. The programs predominantly serve our at-risk population, with a great emphasis on our large population of newly arrived students and students with interrupted formal education (SIFE). These extended programs include After-school, Saturday, Morning, and Holiday Institutes. There are also accelerated programs for eligible students. Students who are enrolled in the accelerated program take the Regents in the following courses: Living Environment and Algebra I Common Core. Throughout the years, I.S. 232 has made it a top priority to involve community organizations to enhance the lives of our students and families. Bridging the gap between home and school is essential to our core values. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. I.S. 232 is an intermediate school, which serves Grades 6-8. There are approximately 500 students enrolled in our school. Our demographics are: 78% Hispanic, 21% Black and 1% White. Of the student population, 41% are English Language Learners and 20% Special Education. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The School Quality Guide 2017 indicates that there are strengths in creating strong family-community ties and supportive environment. While having experienced growth in the areas of trust, collaborative teachers and rigorous instruction, the school will continue to focus on these areas and strengthen our efforts in building meaningful relationships within the school and with the parents and families. 0  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X232 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 488 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 40 42 6 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 40 38 8 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 96.0% % Attendance Rate 95.3% % Reduced Lunch 39.1% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.0% 79.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1.54 3% 26% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 42 42 91.5% 2.3% 23.0% 18.6% 0.8% 0.0% 4 48% 4.3 16.2% 38% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In 2016 the total percentage of students performing at level 1 on the New York State English Language Arts test decreased by 15%. In 2017, the total percentage of students performing at level 1 increased by 3%. 2. After reviewing the results of the 2018 New York State English Language Arts test, level 1 students will be identified and receive targeted instruction based on areas of deficiency. Curriculum and instruction will be aligned to meet the needs of the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, we will decrease the total percentage of students performing at level 1 on the New York State English Language Arts test by 5% from 42% to 37%. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Professional development will be provided to support the school-wide implementation of the curriculum. There will be an emphasis on addressing the priority standards and the strategic use of the curriculum to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities. Teachers will analyze the annotated questions from the 2016-2017 and 2017-2018 tests in order to identify strategies to address the academic needs. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teacher teams will analyze data derived from formative and summative assessments to identify students’ academic strengths and areas in need of improvement. In doing so, teachers will be able to tailor instruction and provide academic intervention (RTI). Teachers Students The educational consultants will work directly with teacher teams, across grades and content areas, to ensure that instructional targets, assessment and units are in alignment with the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Throughout the school year, there will be parent involvement programs including "literacy nights" and "parents as partners in learning", with an emphasis on how to support English Language Learners and Students with Disabilities, to promote literacy development at home. In addition, the school will host workshops that will include helping parents understand the standards, facilitating an understanding of the IEP, and providing parents with strategies for home implementation. Key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight of these initiatives are the parent coordinator, family worker, teachers and the administrative team. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3   The principal and assistant principal will manage the administration of baseline and other formative assessments.  Master schedule programming will allow common planning time for all teachers and/or use of other professional work periods.  Administrators will coordinate the professional developments, teacher team meetings, faculty conferences and support services for teachers.  Borough Field Support Center personnel will provide professional development.  Funding for consultants/vendors to provide training and professional development, in addition to funding to provide parent outreach. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  6-8 week observation cycles focused on effective use of targeted instruction for at-risk students  In January 2019, a simulation English Language Arts test will be administered to assess progress being made to reach school goals Improved performance of English Language Learners in English Language Arts as evidenced by in-house assessments Increased attendance, as measured by previous years attendance records, at parent and family programs    Analyzing data during common planning Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Danielson Framework    Parent Workshop agenda Summative and formative assessment results, including i-Ready Instructional Plans derived from data analyses (i.e. i-Ready, Performance Tasks, in-house assessments) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. In 2017, the total percentage of infractions to the NYCDOE Discipline Code increased 419%. In 2018, under new leadership, the percentage decreased by 385% 2. Although student response and compliance to the school's code of conduct has increased, there continues to be a need to address minor infractions through guidance and intervention 3. School-wide policies and procedures are enforced by the entire staff, not limited to the classroom Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will select and develop core values by which the students and staff will abide in order to achieve a 10% decrease in the number of incidents as recorded on the Online Occurrence Reporting System from 76 to 68 incidents. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional development will be conducted on the impact of core values. The entire staff will work collaboratively to select core values and agree on a working definition and examples of how these values can be demonstrated by the students. Faculty, Students Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers will work with the students to identify core values and understand the impact and be provided with the opportunity and training to determine if additional values should be incorporated. Assistant principals and guidance counselors, in conjunction with the NYPD School Safety Division, will conduct assemblies/class visits pertaining to the school’s values and expectations. Guidance Counselors Teachers Teachers, Sept 2018- Teachers Students June 2019 Students Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Guidance Counselors Principal Assistant Principal Guidance Counselors Faculty/Staff Students will be nominated by staff for awards and other forms of recognition whenever they exemplify core values. These awards will be given at the end of each marking period at an assembly. Students Sept 2018-June 2019 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Once established, the core values will be shared with parents at Curriculum Night, Parent Association meetings and Parent Teacher Conferences so as to encourage the parents to support their child at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 6  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators will coordinate and facilitate professional development on core values for the faculty and staff members  Teachers will incorporate the core value curricula across Grades 6-8  The guidance counselors and other faculty will monitor the implementation of the core values  The school programming will include assembly programs for students in Grades 6-8   Funding for teacher training/PD opportunities outside of the work day Funding for parent workshops and other family engagement activities Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.      staff members will receive training focused on core values students will receive training regarding core value reward system will be established there will be a reduction in number of students being referred to the guidance department and or administration for disciplinary issues student government will be established and will facilitate the implementation of the core value Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Reduction in disciplinary referrals  Establishment of student groups and or clubs  Establishment of Student Government  The Online Occurrence Reporting System Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school's strengths are Learning Environment (indicator 1.4) and High Expectations (indicator 3.4) based on 2017-2018 MOLP. In a review of the 2016-2017 Quality Review, indicator 4.1 was identified as an area of celebration and a strength where as teachers are consistently provided feedback regarding the implementation of instructional strategies. Through strong teacher team rounds, the English Language Arts department were able to identify student areas of deficiencies addressing them in innovative ways resulting in a 12-point gain of proficiency over a course of three years. 2. According to 2017-2018 observation reports and MOLP, there is a need to provide more professional development in order to build teachers’ pedagogy specifically in the components of 3b and 3c in the Danielson Framework for Teaching. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be a 3% reduction in developing and ineffective teacher ratings in domains 3b and 3c based on Advance. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Monthly research-based professional development sessions will be provided based on components 3b (Using Questioning and Discussion Techniques) and 3c (Engaging Students in Learning) Teachers will work in teams during weekly team planning sessions to provide each other with feedback on units and lessons focusing on 3b and 3c of the Danielson Framework. Principal and Assistant Principal will conduct 4-6 formal observations and logged into Advance, whereby meaningful and timely feedback in components 3b and 3c will be provided, as well as purposeful next steps. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers Sept 2018 -June 2019 Principal Assistant Principals Teachers 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The current I.S. 232 website provides parents and the wider community with information regarding the curricular, enrichment and extended day programs in the school. Specific academic areas in need of improvement or additional reinforcement will be communicated via parent conferences and/or during designated parent engagement time. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Instructional leads will facilitate teacher teams on the grade levels and/or content areas.   Assistant Principal will support grade teams in the process of developing questions that engage students in discussion and designing learning activities that allow for maximized student engagement  Administrators will provide professional development on methods to measure rigor  Funding for professional development specific to teacher teams and components 3b and 3c Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 9  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. teacher observations focused on implementation of strategies learned during professional development. teacher-to-teacher feedback    mid-point conference will be held with each teacher to review Advance data based on the Danielson Framework Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance system MOTP tracker, both school-wide and individually  Agendas from professional development sessions.   template for teacher-to-teacher feedback lesson plans Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. Based on review of Advance data, it is evident that teachers need to set goals to improve their rating in all domains of the Danielson Framework. 2. Based on students English Language Arts/Mathematics city-wide outcomes, it is evident that teachers need to be more focused on targeted instruction to increase student performance. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will develop goals that will support their professional growth and increase student outcomes. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? School will implement a goal setting process in the beginning of the year. Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Mid-year, administration will hold individual meetings to review goals. Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal End-of-year conferences will be held to measure goals and alignment to Advance rating/end of year data Teachers Sept 2018- June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principal Teachers will align their goals to the school-wide goals. Teachers Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Throughout the year, families will be invited to forums with school community members in an effort to engage them in the decision making process.  During Parent Association meetings, teacher goals will be shared. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Time will be allocated to prepare goal setting  Professional development will be provided for goal setting Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other 2  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  mid-year progress monitoring of goals set by teacher as measured by student outcomes and Advance data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  goal setting templates given at beginning-of-year, middle-of-year, and end-of-year to be utilized as needed. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. In a review of the NYC School Survey, 2017-2018, 96% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they are greeted warmly when they call or visit the school. We are pleased with that response. 2. Identifiable priority needs indicate 87% of families say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, there will be an 5% increase from 87% to 92% of families that say that school staff regularly communicate with them about how families can help their child learn as measured by the NYC school survey. 4  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Conduct monthly parent workshops to inform parents about what students are learning (i.e. curriculum, etc.) Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Establish and disseminate monthly parent newsletter, which will highlight the instructional foci in the content areas, as well as additional resources which parents may access and utilize to support their children at home. Parents Assistant Principal School Leadership Team Parent Coordinator Sept 2018-June 2019 Principal Assistant Principal Teachers Parent Coordinator Skedula will be updated by each teacher on a weekly basis and training sessions will be conducted for parents on how to use the website to access their child's data. Parents Sept 2018-June 2019 Teachers Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc.  Administrators and parent coordinator will host monthly meetings  Principal and parent coordinator will design the monthly parent newsletter, including "Strategy of the Month"  The principal, parent association and school leadership team will collaborate and host several community events 5   Parent workshops will be facilitated throughout the year Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal.  parent newsletter will be established and distributed to parents  parent workshops and meetings will be conducted to keep parents informed of students' performance and  resources available to support their children an event will be held for the wider community to showcase the curricular and programs, which the school offers as well as sports and other recreational activities (i.e. curriculum night, science fair, talent show, games, etc) Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Curriculum night sign-in sheets  Collection of monthly newsletters  Increased participation in school events Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies  2017-2018SummativeData  2018 Baseline Data  Classroom Observations 7  Ready  Foci: reading Comprehension  2017-2018Summ-ativeData  2018 Baseline Data  Classroom Observations  Unit Assessments  2018 NYSTest Results  2017-2018Summ- Use of ativeData  2017 Baseline Data  Classroom Observations  Unit Assessments  2018 NYSTest Results manipulatives  CMP3 Intervention/Math Games  GlencoaResources Foci: Numeracyand  problem solving  2017-2018SummativeData  2018 Baseline Data  Classroom Observations  Unit Assessments  Foss and Delta Programs Science Lab   Measuring up  Resources Focus: Inquiry approach, problem solving  HoughtonMifflin  Harcourt  Foci: Developing analytical skills, social studies When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before, during and after school hours via Early Morning, After-school, Saturday and Holiday Institutes. Before, during and after school hours via Early Morning, After-school, Saturday and Holiday Institutes. Before, during and after school hours via Early Morning, After-school, Saturday and Holiday Institutes. Before, during and after school hours via Early Morning, After-school,  Small Group  One-to-one  Pull-out/Push-in  Small Group  One-to-one  Pull-out/Push-in  Small Group  One-to-one  Pull-out/Push-in  Small Group  One-to-one   Unit Assessments Classroom observations Anecdotals IEPMandates At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) literacy and guided reading   Counseling  Sports/Recreational Programs Foci: Nutrition, asthma, hygiene, obesity and other health related issues.  Pull-out/Push-in  Small Group  One-to-one  Pull-out/Push-in Saturday and Holiday Institutes. Before, during and after school hours via Early Morning, After-school, Saturday and Holiday Institutes. 8  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are 105 students in temporary housing, currently enrolled at I.S. 232. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Students in temporary housing will be provided with:  book-bags with supplies, on-grade reading books and school uniforms. leveled texts which are designated for students in temporary housing.  further support through extended weekly programs (After School, Early Morning, Saturday and Holiday  Institutes) Those students deemed in need of academic intervention (RTI) and other related services will receive them during the course of the regular school day through “pull-out or push-in” small group instruction. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 9  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 0  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) are recruited through professional references, internships and student teaching initiatives. Newly recruited teachers are provided a support team and participate in orientation. New teachers are assigned peer mentors. Mentors assist new teachers in getting acclimated to the school, its culture, curricula, instructional planning and other professional development opportunities. Peer mentors also guide new teachers in implementing the systemic practices of the school and will share resources, giving careful attention to new teachers' needs, in an effort to improve their pedagogy. Supervisors also provide additional support through formal and informal observations. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In addition to being fully certified and licensed in their assigned areas, current staff will become highly qualified through participation in on-site professional development activities, such as grade meetings, study groups and off-site trainings, including Emerging Leaders Program, Common Core Fellowship, Teacher Leadership Program and District or Department of Education workshops. Participants will then facilitate peer sessions to "turn key" or share the information and knowledge gleaned in teacher-led teams. Additionally, in weekly grade meetings led by supervisors or grade conveners, teachers engage in instructional planning and data analyses of students' artifacts such as class work, benchmark folders and periodic assessments. Through the process of teacher teams, each individual will have ample opportunities to hone his or her inquiry skills. In addition to the menu of professional development opportunities previously mentioned, in an effort to build capacity and establish leaders at the various levels of the school, staff members are also encouraged to continue their educational pursuit as their needs dictate, such as graduate, post-graduate degrees and certification in areas of interest. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 1  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers participated on the Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) Selection Team to determine assessments which would be utilized. Additionally, teachers have an opportunity to participate in designing internal school assessments such as Performance Based Assessments (PBA) and end-of-unit assessments, as well as class assignments and tasks which assess students' performance and achievement. Teachers participate in weekly grade-alike meetings or teacher team meetings where they examine artifacts generated by students on their respective grades and across the contents. They engage in data analyses to determine strengths and weaknesses as well as the adjustments deemed necessary to the instructional units. They participate in professional development sessions led by the school's principal with the collective staff from Grades 6 through 8. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are 2  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) 496,572 0 25,294 25,294 3,863,090 consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) X X X X X Column B Section Reference(s) 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, 5E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs 3   Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 4  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. I.S. 232, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. i. S. 232 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 5  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 6  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication (including email) between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) I.S. 232, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 7  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 8  ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 9  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; 0  ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our middle school serves 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students. It is composed of 499 students of which 189 were born outside the United States, 323 have a home language other than English, and 232 receive ENL services. Due to our high number of immigrants and non-native English speakers, we must offer supplemental academic support through our after-school and Saturday programs. These additional instructional supports are aligned with our TBE school program and are geared towards increasing our students' proficiency in English Language Arts and Mathematics. Our after-school and Saturday enrichment programs benefit all of our students but have an emphasize on providing services to students who need extra academic support due to being new arrivals and/or having difficulties with the language. The after-school program will begin on Wednesday, November 7, 2018 and terminate on June 2019. The program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20pm to 4:20pm. Within each grade there will be two groups of students, one higher-level ELL and one lower-level ELL (NYESLAT and NYSITELL scores will be used for adequate placement). Each day there will be one certified Mathematics teacher and one certified ELA/ENL teacher per grade (total of 6). Each teacher will have the opportunity to work with one group per day. By the end of the week each group of students should receive 2 hours of mathematics and 2 hours of ELA support. Higher-level ELLS will receive all instruction in English, while the lower-level ELLs will receive the mathematics material in Spanish and Spanish support during their ELA/ENL lessons. After-school curriculum: ELA/ENL teachers will use the Crosswalk Coach for the Common Core State Standards workbook with the higher-level ELLs and the Finish Line New York ELLs Bilingual Common Core workbooks with the lower-level ELLs. ELLs will practice the skills needed to answer speaking, listening, reading, and writing questions aligned to the common core learning standards. Mathematic teachers will use Go Math workbooks in English and Spanish during direct instruction time. With a direct focus on the 6 mathematics shifts: focus, coherence, fluency, deep understanding, application, and dual intensity. The Saturday Enrichment program will begin on Saturday, November 10, 2010 and will terminate June 2019. The program will begin at 8:00am and end at 12:00pm. Like the after-school program, there will be two certified teachers, Mathematics and ELA/ENL, per grade (total of 6 teachers) and students will be divided by their grade level and English proficiency. Teachers will provide two hours of instruction per subject to each group in the language the students are most proficient. Saturday Enrichment Program Curriculum: ELA/ENL and Mathematics teachers will use the I-ready curriculum that can be differentiated based on the students' English and mathematics proficiency. Teachers and students will have access to Ipads, laptops, and workbooks to facilitate and differentiate learning. 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Teachers will have access to the students' ELA, Mathematics, and NYESLAT state exam scores to facilitate lesson planning and needed differentiation. The progress of student learning will be measured every 4 weeks using the I-ready ELA and math online tests. The result of these assessments will be used to assess areas of struggle for each student and the necessity of other interventions. In order to properly fund these programs, additional funding will derive from the school's annual budget. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: ELA and ENL teachers will participate in on-going training and professional development seminars offered through our Borough Support Office and other Department of Education services. Teachers will participate in these professional development activities to gain innovative teaching techniques and understanding of how to best serve the ELL population in our school community. There will be an emphasis on creating rigorous teaching and learning standards; as well as how to best differentiate and foster learning. Teachers who attend these learning seminars will then turnkey the best practices for our TBE department. The Bilingual Coordinator, Ms. Erika Enriquez, will be attending the following three part series of professional developments offered by our Borough Support office: Topic: Educating Powerful Writers: NYC DOE Middle School Writing Dates: Tuesday, July 31, 2018 Wednesday, August 1, 2018 Thursday, August 2, 2018 Rationale: This three part series will increase teachers' understanding the implementing the Middle School Writing Scope and Sequenceof the foundations of TBE programs and the steps required to prepare and implement effective and sustainable programs. During these sessions, we will be reviewing our current TBE curriculum; as well as grade specific lessons in HLA and ENL. Throughout the school year, TBE teachers across all content areas will participate in site-based staff development provided by the Bilingual Coordinator, Ms. Enriquez, the math coach, Mr. Santana, and the Literacy coach, Ms. Sorrentino. During these in-house professional development sessions, teachers will further analyze: * Differentiation * ELA/ESL Standards * NYESLAT Assessments * ELL Data 4  Part C: Professional Development Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Throughout the school year, parents of English Language Learners will be invited to participate in various workshops aimed to helping them understand the TBE program and how they can be active participants in their child’s education. All workshops will be conducted and materials will be distributed in English and Spanish. To increase parental participation, parents will be notified of the workshops via our automated calling system and backpacked letters. In addition, workshops will be offered at varied times and we will offer refreshments. Topic: Skedula / Pupilpath Rationale: Familiarize parents and guardians with an online resource that tracks their child’s academic progress and communication with teachers. Name of Provider: Ms. Peralta, Parent Coordinator Topic: Understanding the TBE Program Rationale: Parents will receive information on our current TBE curriculum and other city-wide program options. Name of Provider: Ms. Enriquez, Bilingual Coordinator and Ms. Peralta, Parent Coordinator Topic: Parent Association Rationale: Provide parents with the opportunity to learn up-to-date information regarding the school, request services, plan activities. Name of provider: Ms. Martha Lopez, PA President and Ms. Peralta, Parent Coordinator Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title.  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name I.S. 232X - The Alexander Macomb School Borough Bronx School Number 232 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Desiree Resto Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Daniel Mejia Teacher/Subject Area Erika Enriquez Teacher/Subject Area Danilo Pena Related-Service Provider Isamar Rivera Superintendent Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Assistant Principal N/A Coach N/A School Counselor Carolyn Gonzalez-Guerrero Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Edwin Velazquez Field Support Center Staff Member Luis Quan Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 3 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 8 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 520 7 Total number of ELLs 209 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 40.19%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish/English If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 2 7 3 8 2 9 10 11 12 0 2 3 2 0 0 0 0 Tot # 7 0 0 0 0 0 7 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Reading running records are used to measure oral accuracy, fluency and comprehension. Baseline, midline and endline writing assessments are utilized to measure content, conventions, syntax and vocabulary. Other formative assessments include the NYSITELL which is used for initial identification and determination of eligibility for English Language development support services. The assessment is given once to new admits, and within 10 days of their enrollment in the school. The NYSITELL results indicate students' English proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. The Spanish LAB is also administered to Spanish-speaking students, who have not attained a score of commanding in the NYSITELL. This assessment is utilized to determine Spanish language proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening. The assessment is administered once, with the same administration window of the NYSITELL. Teachers also utilize group/class discussions, presentations, portfolios, conferencing, observation, writing pieces, exit slips. All of the aforementioned data is used to drive the curricula 8  and tailor instruction according to identified student needs. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The teachers meet in teams across the content as well as across grade bands to analyze the data and to engage in inquiry based work once the identifiable trends are determined. Administrators meet with individual teachers to discuss student progress as a result of the implementation of strategic and intentional instruction. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? In house created performance tasks are utilized to identify progress towards the identified areas of need. These assessments are administered in ELA and HLA. In addition to these efforts, unit assessments, periodic assessments, the NYS ELA test, the NYSESLAT results are used to provide insight into students' strengthens and weaknesses, as well as class, grade and school-wide trends. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Once the summative data has been gathered, students are identified and placed into tiered groups. A teacher then provides groups of students with academic intervention services based on one strand at a time. The teacher either pushes in or pulls out depending on the instructional program. Furthermore, the students are invited to participate in after school programs and Saturday academies in an effort to address remediation skills. Lastly, the teacher teams meet to review the curriculum and design opportunities for interventions through strategic learning activities. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Tier 1: - Group work to engage students in discussion in every subject - Introduction of vocabulary and concepts before the lesson - Drawing on and using students’ home languages - Book Club / Literature circles - Code X is utilized as an ELA curricular resource which includes relevant multicultural literature, poems, and novels - Promote different types of writing purposes, genres, and formats leading to monthly writing pieces - They use writing to analyze text in their Code X books as well as with the novels within the literature circles. - ELLs utilize the writing process for their monthly writing pieces - Students identify rhymes, cognates, prefixes, root words, and suffixes during shared or independent reading - Read aloud and modeling of fluent, expressive reading is done on a daily basis - Partner reading - Ask a variety of questions to promote understanding and prompt critical thinking and analysis - Access students' prior knowledge Tier 2 and 3: - Homogeneous small group instruction (3-5 students) within the class - Homogeneous AIS pull-out group to remediate specific skills or concept - Analyze data on formative and summative assessments to determine academic needs and the necessary instructional support - Differentiated Instruction - Unit assessments and other periodic assessments - Students are exposed to figurative language through complex texts 9  6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The results from the NYSESLAT, NYS ELA and Math tests are used to evaluate and inform the ELL program. The data gathered is used to develop targeted instruction at the students' proficiency levels. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The teachers meet in teams to analyze the findings. The data that is gathered is discussed and used in designing coherent instruction and strategic learning activities. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The freestanding ENL program is a block model whereas the class travels together as a group. Students are placed in class on grade level according to their proficiency level. Students receive ENL instruction within the content subjects. b. TBE program. If applicable. The TBE program has a block model. Each class travels together as a group. The newly arrived students homogeneously grouped and are comprised of students at different beginning and intermediate English language proficiency levels. The other classes classes are homogeneously grouped and comprised of students ranging from intermediate and advanced levels. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? English Language Learners in the TBE classes receive the mandated ENL units. English as a New Language students receive 360 minutes of ENL. ENL is incorporated within the content areas and they also receive 360 minutes of ENL (2 periods each day) by certified bilingual teachers. English Language Learners at the intermediate or advance level receive the mandated ENL units through the content areas as well as part of their literacy 90 minute block. English Language Leaders in the mainstream classes are scheduled to be pulled-out for ENL services according to their proficiency level. The number of periods they are pulled-out depends on their English proficiency level as indicated in the chart below. Those at the beginning and intermediate levels are pulled out for eight periods, 0r 360 minutes, per week by a certified ESL teacher. Students at an advanced level are pulled out four periods, or 180 minutes per week by a certified ESL teacher. The beginning and intermediate level ELLs participate in an extended-day program that gives them the opportunity to use reading, listening, writing, and speaking strategies as they perform different language acquisition tasks. Delivery of English Language Arts: ELLs in the TBE classes receive a combination of ELA and ESL during their daily 90 minute ESL block. These students are at beginning to intermediate levels of English proficiency. ELA is taught by certified bilingual teachers who incorporate ESL 0  strategies in their lessons. The mainstreamed ELLs at an advanced level of English proficiency receive the same daily 90 minute block from a certified English teacher. Those at the beginning and intermediate levels receive daily a period, or 45 minutes, of ELA from a certified teacher. They are pulled-out eight periods a week to receive ESL services. Those at an advanced level are pulled out four periods a week for ESL services. During their literacy block there's a teacher that pushes-in or co-teaches one of the periods in order to have extra support in the classroom. Some co-teachers work with a designated group of ELLs on the assignment given by the literacy teacher. If the ELL students are at a beginning or low intermediate level, the co-teacher will pull-out the ELLs for small group instruction. Delivery of HLA: All ELLs in TBE are mandated to receive NLA units of support each week. These services are provided by licensed Spanish teachers. All classes receive at least one period of NLA per day. The newly arrived students receive a 90- minute HLA block since they are at a beginning to low intermediate level of English proficiency. The students at the intermediate or advance level receive daily 45 minutes of NLA instruction. Bilingual classes also have Spanish classroom libraries at different levels and can use the school library which has an extensive Spanish library. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Delivery of Mathematics: Students in TBE classes receive a daily 90-minute block of mathematics daily by certified bilingual teachers who incorporate ENL strategies in their lessons. Students with low levels of mathematics proficiency (level 1) are pulled out for academic intervention in small groups during regular school hours. The teachers also incorporate the mathematics vocabulary in English in order to build their math vocabulary. Mainstreamed ELLs, or those in Freestanding ENL Program, receive instruction by certified teachers in English. Delivery of Science: Students in TBE classes receive four periods (45 minutes each period) of science instruction weekly. Students receive instruction in English by certified bilingual teachers who incorporate ESL strategies in their lessons. These teachers also incorporate the science vocabulary in English in order to expand the students’ English vocabulary. Mainstreamed ELLs, or those in Freestanding ENL Program, receive instruction by certified teachers in English. Delivery of Social Studies: Students in TBE classes receive four periods (45 minutes each period) of social studies instruction, each week. English dominant ELLs receive instruction in English by certified bilingual teachers who incorporate ENL strategies in their lessons. Spanish dominant ELLs receive instruction in Spanish by certified bilingual teachers. These teachers also incorporate the social studies vocabulary in English for the expansion of the students’ English vocabulary. Mainstreamed ELLs, or those in Freestanding ENL Program, receive instruction by certified teachers in English. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? Teacher teams develop assessments in the students home language. This includes end of unit performance tasks as well as weekly quizzes and monthly exams. They are administered based on the school wide assessment calendar. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status 1  a. SIFE Students classified as SIFE, are supported through individual conferences with classroom content area and ENL teachers. They are also supported through small group instruction and afforded many opportunities to converse with their peers and teahers in English. They are also supported in the classroom by their teachers to access to curriculum. Students with Interrupted Formal Education (SIFE) are further supported through AIS and extended day program which targets literacy in their first language. The objective is that of increasing students self-esteem and pride in their language and cultural background, as well as to increase the likelihood of students academic success by reinforcing and strengthening their Spanish language skills. b. Newcomer In addition to the daily CCLA-aligned instruction and AIS, students participate in ENL summer program prior to the start of the school year. The program provides cross cultural experiences in ENL which allows students to learn English language skills through academic, social and recreational activities. The educational experience is further augmented through the offering of extended-day and holiday academies to strengthen their skills. c. Developing English Language Learners receive standards-based curricular instruction in the content areas during the regular school hours. They also receive AIS, as deemed necessary. ELLs receiving service 4-6 years who are in general education classes are also pulled out by a certified teacher. They receive either 180 or 360 minutes per week according to level of English proficiency scored in the NYSESLAT. Those in TBE recieve the units of ENL by a certified bilingual teacher within their classroom setting. Additionally, students participate in several after school and holiday academies. d. Long- Term ELLs Long-term ELLs are afforded multiple entry points to instruction, which is aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. AIS is implemented during the regular school day. Long term ELLs in general education classes are also pulled out by a certified teacher. They receive either 180 or 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week, according to the level of English proficiency scored on the NYSESLAT. Those in TBE classes recieve the units of ENL by a certified bilingual teacher within their classroom setting. Students also participate in academies beyond the regular school hours. e. Plan for former ELLs Former ELLs receive instruction in the different content areas which are in alignment with the CCLS. Their educational experiences are further enriched by the AIS and extended day programs. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Instructional strategies that are used include designing activities that address the needs of visual, auditory and tactile learners. Each classroom is equipped with a smart board to address the different types of learners. Manipulatives are also used during the lessons. Various instructional, curricular and technological materials are utilized such as: Code X, CMP3, Ready New York, laptops and iPads. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Students in mandated self-contained classes receive ENL instruction through the CCLS aligned curricula as well as through integration with general education classes during content area instruction of physical education and technology, extended day programs, assembly programs, recess, and trips. Meanwhile ELLs in ICT classes have an opportunity to interact with their general education counterparts for the entire day. While ENL and related services are provided as mandated by 2  their I.E.Ps. Furthermore, teacher teams meet to develop strategic lessons that cam be modified to meet the performance level of students with IEPs. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. ELLs receive explicit and intensive instruction in phonological and syntax awareness in order to build decoding skills. This instructional approach transcends all content areas. In addition, Science and Social Studies are incorporated into the Literacy and ENL curriculum. This requires the incorporation of more non fiction reading into literacy and requires that ELL students respond to open-ended questions that include text citations to support their claims. SIFE: In addition to the daily standards-driven instruction the alignment to the home language is ensured. Also, newly arrived ELLs are pulled out to receive instruction in their identified area of need. These students are also invited to attend after school, Saturday programs and summer enrichment programs to address remedial skills. Strategies that are utilized are: activating prior knowledge, hands on learning, modified lessons that include differentiated tasks and constant checks for understanding. ELLs (4-6 years) and long term ELLs (completed 6 years): In addition to the daily standards-driven instruction, these students receive AIS during the regular school day. Like their peers they participate in extended day programs to further enhance their performance and progress. Furthermore the teachers will use the SIOP model to ensure that targeted language objectives are incorporated into each lesson. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELL students are invited to participate in all school programs. The after school services for the ELL students take place twice a week for a total of four hours. Additionally, each Friday students are afforded the opportunity to engage with their peers during various extra curricular programs. On Saturdays, ELL students are invited to attend an academy focused on remediation skills in reading and math for a total of four hours. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. English as a Native Language teachers follow an ENL curriculum and have various supplemental materials. All bilingual classes have ENL classroom libraries which range in proficiency levels. Teachers use manipulatives , audio-visual equipment, language computer software, smart boards, and a myriad of visuals to stimulate learning. Curricular resources such as Common Core Code X, Ready New York CCLS, Math Project 3 (CMP3), New York Science and Holt Social Studies, Keys to Learning, Shining Star and Visions. Dictionaries are also utilized which include, French-English and Spanish-English dictionaries. The native language arts dictionaries include Santillana En Espanol, Encuentros, and Spanish classroom libraries at different levels. The technological resources include smartboards in all classrooms, laptop carts, iPad carts and a school-wide computer lab. All mathematics, science, and social studies texts workbooks and visuals/audio are available in English and Spanish. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? 3  TBE Students in TBS classes adhere to the Language Allocation Policy (LAP). Newcomers receive 60% of instruction in their native language and 40% of instruction in English. Developing students receive 50% of instruction in Spanish and 50% of instruction in English. Long term students receive 25% of instruction in their native language and 75% of instruction in English. All content area textbooks and workbooks (Math, Science and Social Studies) are available in Spanish and English and students are permitted to trans language as needed. Home language support is assessed through teacher observation and student conferences on a bi-weekly basis. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All students' resources are appropriately matched with the grade level and the CCLS grade standards. Small group instruction and AIS are provided in order to, scaffold support and provide access to a rigorous curriculum, in addition to their ENL services. All teachers plan together and are held accountable for providing grade appropriate standards based instruction aligned to the CCLS. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The collocated school does not have a TBE or freestanding ENL class. Students that they identify as newcomer or developing are referred to our school. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). During the enrollment process, the parent coordinator, family worker and secretary, provide the parent and child with an orientation in Spanish. If the preferred language is other than Spanish, a staff member or interpreter provides translating services and assist in facilitating the orientation. Subsequent to the orientation, they are introduced to other key personnel and given a quick tour of locations throughout the building such as the cafeteria, gym, clinic, auditorium, main office and restrooms. The uniform, arrival and dismissal procedures, schedule and attendance policy are also explained. There is also a buddy system, which new admits are paired with other students who speak their native language. This partnership provides additional support throughout the school days, in addition to that of the teacher. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? English Language Learner personnel will participate in professional development activities offered by the office of ELLs as well as the Bronx Field Support Center ELL liaison. The school will also provide PD around the ENL models and the appropriate 4  resources to support ENL implementation including that of the CCLS. Teachers of ELLs are provided with on and off site professional development that unpack the CCLS standards, the instructional shifts and instructional methodologies to teach content and support students. They will engage in common planning and teacher team meetings to utilize data to drive instruction. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. A year long professional development plan is outlined in September to guarantee that the requirements are met. The agendas and attendance records will be maintained by the Bilingual Coordinator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parents are invited to the periodic town hall meetings as well as Tuesday afternoons to share goals, performance and progress of their students. The Bilingual Coordinator will meet with parents individually to discuss the language development progress. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the beginning of the school year and at the mid-way point, parents will be given a survey to identify needs, interests and specific activities. The parent coordinator and bilingual coordinator meet with parents of ELLs throughout the school year. They provide translation services in Spanish and other staff members serve as translators of other languages and dialects. We will provide the following workshops: Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Desiree Resto, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: The Alexander Macombs I.S. 232 School DBN: 09x232 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Desiree Resto Title Principal N/A N/A Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator Daniel Mejia ENL/Bilingual Teacher N/A Parent Erika Enriquez Teacher/Subject Area Danilo Pena Teacher/Subject Area N/A N/A Coach Coach Carolyn Gonzalez-Guerrero School Counselor Leticia Rodriguez-Rosario Luis Quan N/A N/A N/A Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member ELL Other N/A Other N/A Other N/A Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 6/30/17 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09 School Name: 232 Superintendent: Ms. Rosario The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Yanelly Peralta Parent Coordinator Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon enrollment our school determines the home language spoken by parents as well as their preferred language of communication. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. The Bilingual Coordinator gives the parent or guardian a Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) in their primary language (or if not available, then in English) when students and their parents first arrive. The survey has questions to identify the student's home language and preferred language. Parents also complete a Student Registration Form, a Parent/Guardian Student Ethnic Identification Form (PSE), a Parents' Preferred Language Form and an Emergency Contact Card that asks what is the parent's preferred language of written and oral communication. These three forms along with an interview conducted by an interpreter inform us of the languages spoken by our parents/guardians and of our translation needs. This allows us to to determine the languages in which we must translate all information sent home to the parents as well as the interpreters needed during any school function in which parents are invited to attend. As soon as parents complete the forms the 8  information is entered in ATS ELPC screen and used to ensure that our parents' translation needs are met accordingly. Data and methodologies used to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation needs consists of the following: 1. Student Registration Form - here this must indicate their home language 2. Parents' Preferred Language Form 3. Informal interview to determine the language needs of the parent 4. Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS) followed by an interview by the Bilingual/ESL Coordinator 5. Emergency Contact Card -here parents are asked what language they prefer all written and oral communication 6. Parent/Student Ethnic Identification Surveys 7. Place of Birth report (RPOB) 8. Home Language Report (RHLA) 9. Language Allocation Policy (LAP) Part III ELL Demographics - this document has a breakdown of ELLs home language by grade 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Araucanian Arabic Bengali French Hausa English Spanish Soninke 0 1 2 1 1 299 386 1 0 0.14 0.29 0.14 0.14 43.27 55.86 0.14 1 1 2 1 1 298 386 1 0.14 0.14 0.29 0.14 0.14 43.13 55.86 0.14 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A 9  Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Orientation Notices September 2018 Parent Bill of Rights September 2018 Discipline Code/Bill of Student Rights and Responsibilities September 2018 Registration Forms a. emergency contact card b. Home language survey c. Student registration form As needed d. Parents preferred language form e. lunch form ELL Orientation Materials As needed Lunch forms As needed Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When 0  Morris Heights Clinic Registration Form As needed All after-school and Saturday Institute consent forms October 2018 - ongoing School Dance Permission slip As needed Field Trip Consent form As needed Progress Reports Quarterly Report Cards Quarterly Promotion in doubt letters February 2018 High School information October 2018 necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of 1  Senior/Graduation activities September 2018 - ongoing Parent surveys Ongoing Legal, disciplinary and safety matters Ongoing Special assemblies and celebrations As needed Parent Newsletter Monthly Monthly Event calendar Monthly the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil secretary will translate into all necessary languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages.When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. 2  Initial Registration Interview (student and parent) English Language Learner Parent Orientation September 2018 and as needed September 2018 and as needed Parent teacher conferences Quarterly High School Informational sessions September 2018 and as needed Curriculum Night September 2018 Parent workshops As needed Disciplinary Meetings As needed PA Meetings As needed IEP Meetings As needed Special Assemblies and Celebrations As needed Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. 3  Graduation Ceremony June 2018 Parent Coordinator and Pupil Secretary will translate into all necessary languages. When necessary, the school will make use of the 24/7 Language line that serves over 200 languages. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Where the language is Spanish, the designated language translator or the designee will contact the family. In all other cases, the school personnel will contact the NYCDOE translating service to enter into a third-party call. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. In September, the staff will receive professional development in Chancellor's Regulation A-663 at the mid-point of the year, the staff will revisit the key points from the session. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) All the correspondences given to parents are in Spanish and English. As mentioned above this includes but is not limited to the following documents: parent notices, Bill of Parents Rights, Discipline Code-Bill of Student Rights and Responsibilities, initial registration documents (Emergency Contact Card, HLIS, Parents' Preferred Language Form, and Student Registration Form), report cards, lunch forms, Morris Heights clinic registration form, after-school and Saturday academy consent forms, school dance permission slips, progress reports, testing information, promotion in doubt letters, High School information, senior activities, graduation program, field trip consent form, ELL Parent Brochure, Parent Notifications of their child's ELL program eligibility, parent surveys, and legal matters. We also obtain documents from the City of New York Department of Education as well as from their website. If other translation services are needed, the translations are done in-house by our staff members. The signs posted throughout the school are in English and Spanish. Parents are also made aware of their rights to translation services in their initial interview, also by our office staff, and finally through signs posted in the main office and the announcements bulletin board. Welcome Posters are located in the main office as well as at the lobby. The Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access are located in the main office in English, Spanish, and French. The Language ID Guide is located in the main office. 4  We fulfill Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulations A-663 earlier in the school year no later than 30 days after the opening of school. By September 30, Parent Preferred Language survey will be distributed making us aware of the parents preferred language of communication. This data will help us determine the languages in which school correspondence must be translated and the interpretation services needed during conferences, PA, ceremonies, and other meetings. This way we can make the appropriate accommodations in a timely manner. If we are unable to provide these services with in-house staff, then the services will be requested from the Department of Education's Translation and Interpretation Office. By this time signs will be posted in the main office and announcement bulletin board making parents aware of the translation and interpretation services available to them at this school and where to go in order to request these services. Also, letters will be distributed notifying the parents and guardians, whose home language isn't covered by the translations provided by the Department of Education, of their rights as per Chancellor's Regulations in regards to translation and interpretation services. When interpretation services are needed, we have in-house staff available that speak their home language. In the case that neither parent speaks English and we don't have an in-house staff member who speaks the language, then we will request interpretation and/or translation services from the DOE Translation and Interpretation office. Theses findings will be shared with parents through correspondence, school website, bulletin board announcement, and during PA meetings. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We will survey all parents twice a year (November and March) to evaluate their ability to understand the information that is sent by the school related to parent programs and events. This information will serve to gather feedback from parents to plan, review, and improve our services. We will create a focus group of parents, inclusive of all cultures and languages represented in our school, to gather feedback and best practices on communicating with families. 5 
