 10X244 School Name: THE NEW SCHOOL FOR LEADERSHIP AND JOURNALISM Principal: EDUARDO MORA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information M.S. 244 321000010244 6-8 School Number (DBN): 10X244 120 West 231 st Street Bronx, NY 10463 718-601-2869 718-601-2867 Phone Number: Fax: Eduardo Mora emora2@schools.nyc.gov Email Address: School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Eduardo Mora Mark Gryzlo Valerie Torres Nancy Acosta Valerie Torres Ruben Quiles Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MaribelHulla Superintendent: 1 Fordham Plaza Bronx, NY 10458 MHulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, NY 10458 jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: 718-828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Eduardo Mora Mark Gryzlo Valerie Torres Valerie Torres Ruben Quiles ArleneRomenello Jessica Valle *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ PTA/SLT/Parent Member/ PTA/SLT/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Brianda Lakeram Nancy Acosta YesseniaRivera Catherine Miller Olga Calderon Member/ PTA/SLT/Parent Member/ SLT/Staff Member/ SLT/Staff Member/SLT/Staff Member/SLT/Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? M.S. 244’s mission statement is as follows: Section 4: CEP Overview We commit ourselves to creating critical readers and writers; skilled in oral and written communication. The school community feels an obligation to address the academic, social, and physical needs of our adolescent students, and to provide a variety of experiences in which students can achieve success. Through intensive arts and science programs, students will be provided with a global and technological driven experience. Our students will develop leadership   skills through academic achievement, pro-active citizenship, and community service, and they will understand how these skills can transform the individual, a community, and a society. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. M.S. 244 (10X244), a community middle school serving grades 6-8, is located in the Kingsbridge section of the Bronx. Its average student population is nearly 750 students and reflects the diversity of the surrounding neighborhood. Since its founding in 2005, M.S. 244 has strived to be a place for students to experience success and accomplishment through learning opportunities both inside and out of the classroom. A key aspect to the work at M.S. 244 revolves around the use of an Advisory system led by school counselors. During weekly Advisory sessions, students work with their counselors to learn study and organizational skills, access attendance supports, explore positive peer interactions and personal development through social-emotional learning, and set both short-term and long-term goals with college and career readiness in mind. Moreover, Advisory presents the opportunity for students to focus on their current academic performance and work towards improvement. Advisory is also a link between the classroom and students’ homes as counselors support families and teachers in holding meaningful dialogue about a child’s academic and social-emotional growth. Through Advisory, M.S. 244 is able to identify students who are on and off-target towards middle school success and work collaboratively with teachers, parents/guardians, school counselors, administration, and students themselves to provide the necessary supports to best position a student for success. The Advisory program at M.S. 244 helps our school support its mission to promote the principles of knowledge, leadership, and service. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 25% of the MS 244 student population represents students with special needs. Additionally, 25% of the school population are English Language Learners. M.S. 244 is committed to supporting all students with diverse learning and language needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. School Strengths Social-emotional supports for students used in conjunction with Advisory   Technology in the classroom (interactive whiteboards, Chromebooks, Macbooks, and iPads) and its integration through instruction (Google Classroom); we are approaching a 1:1 student to technology device ratio  Ongoing partnerships with community and cultural organizations such as: Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, Morris Heights Health Center, the Park Avenue Armory, Bronx Arts Ensemble, and Urban Advantage  Creating opportunities for students to have experiential learning through class trips to various cultural institutions like the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Storm King Art Center, and historical sites such as Washington D.C. 0   According to the 2016-2017 School Quality Snapshot, MS 244 is rated "excellent" in the Student Achievement based on the percent of students at a Level 3 or 4 on the New York State exams (41% in English and 28% in Math) Accomplishments  A tradition of multiple eighth grade students gaining entry into private, Catholic, NYC DOE Specialized High Schools, NYC DOE highly selective, and NYC DOE arts-based audition high schools  High student and parent satisfaction rates as evidenced in the latest School Survey  Robust arts programming  90% of former 8th graders earned enough high school credit in 9th grade to be on track for graduation School Challenges  Developing the supports and scaffolds necessary to increase student proficiency ratings in ELA and Math  Supporting teachers in developing their practice to increase student proficiency through cycles of data inquiry and data driven instruction  Expand inclusive/facilitative leadership among teachers  Working to help families keep students on track for college and career readiness Areas of Growth and Focus Most Growth  Integrating technology into instruction on a daily basis through such programs as iReady, BrainPOP, and Discovery Education  Expanding partnerships with community organizations to support experiential learning for students and engagement with families  Offering a variety of programs, classes, and activities to keep students interested in school  Refining the scope of our Advisory program to better support college and career readiness Focus  Expand the use of benchmark/interim assessments to identify and target student specific needs as part of the process of data inquiry and data-driven instruction  Provide collaborative professional learning opportunities to expand teacher practice around areas of growth for groups of students  Develop stronger practices around protocols when examining student work in teacher team meetings  Ensure curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across the different grade levels 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X244 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 748 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 83 86 17 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 96 90 5 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 97.0% % Attendance Rate 96.5% % Reduced Lunch 21.4% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.8% 80.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.4% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 4.43 2% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 39.5% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A NO YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A NO YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A YES N/A YES YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 50 50 92.9% 0.9% 22.1% 12.3% 4.1% 0.9% 4 33% 7 21.2% 24% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO YES YES N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: According to the 2015-16 Middle School Quality Snapshot, 41% of students met state standards on the NYS ELA exam and 28% on the Math exam with an average scores of 2.8 in ELA and 2.6 in Math. Strengths around this Element: Leveraging programs such as Literature and Thought by Perfection Learning in ELA and GO Math! in Math   Use of Mathletics (Math) and I-Ready (ELA & Math) to support assessment and provide targeted instruction based on need  Creation and implementation of interim/benchmark assessments facilitated through the use of Mastery Connect Needs around this Element:    Supporting teachers in scaffolding instruction for all students to support mastery with a special emphasis on research-based practices around supporting ELLs and SWDs Further developing teacher practice around data-driven instruction and the data inquiry cycle Identifying which combination of materials and instructional strategies best promote student gains in key standards master  Helping support the school community (students, staff, and parents) in understanding how shifts in literacy and math are supporting greater rigor in student work and assessments Data Sources: 2016-17 School Quality Snapshot Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Based on five interim assessments aligned to state exams administered in 6-8 week intervals during the 2018-19 school year, our school will identify three standards in each subject through data results that require additional instructional support in an effort to improve student proficiency on the New York State ELA and Math exams to 45%. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Disaggregated data from last state exam with all relevant stakeholders Teachers August 2018-September 2018 ELA and Math Teachers, Administrative Team Compile a listing of low inference observations based on the data and create norms around reviewing data Share this information with school staff and solicit feedback about ways to improve results Revisit our school’s theory of action around creating high expectations for all students in each subject areas Evaluate current systems and structures around interim assessments in ELA and Math. Reflect on areas of logistical improvement based on staff feedback (e.g. pacing of the assessment calendar, assessment creation process, communicating results and findings from assessments) Reflect on coaching practices around data ELA and Math Teachers, Administrative Team August 2018-September 2018 ELA and Math Teachers, Administrative Team Inventory of instructional resources beyond the Code X and CMP3 program in support of student achievement related to particular standards and learning objectives ELA and Math Teacher Administrative Team August 2018-September 2018 Monitor the use of these resources and evaluate effectiveness Provide professional learning around data-driven instruction and the data inquiry cycle to teachers and administrators. Work in collaboration to create target groups of students based on assessment results to track and monitor progress over the course of interim assessments (e.g. Engage in reflection on the supervisor-teacher data feedback cycle on how to best structure coaching to have the greatest impact on classroom instruction. Create systems for monitoring and accountability Ongoing ELA and Math Teachers, Administrative Team Administrative Team, Outside service providers 4 practices around data-driven instruction informed by assessment results Teaching Strategies: Chucking the text, Wait Time, Questioning, Think Pair Share, Turn and Talk, Identify the best means of measuring the impact of this work. Communicate identified standards to the entire school community, to include students, parents/guardians, and staff, to create a rally calling for improvement. Provide professional development on the following strategies for SWDs and ENLs: Flexible grouping, chunking, using Rewards to improve vocabulary, orton-gillingham, and the program Power Reading 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will be invited to workshops centered on understanding the grade curriculum and grade level requirements for promotion. The M.S. 244 school counselors will take a role in leading this initiative throughout the year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: collective buy-in and participation of all teachers in support of the increased mastery of the three identified standards facilitated through Mastery Connect, student and family awareness and responsiveness to these standards, and support of the Administrative Team in achieving this goal Instructional Resources: Measuring Up!, GO Math!, Rally ELA, and iReady Schedule Adjustments: designate certain Mondays professional learning time to support the goal, support teachers in administering interim assessments Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our midterm assessments in ELA and Math held in January will serve as the mid-point benchmark to monitor progress around this goal. This mid-term assessment will occur after the third interim assessment and be a culmination of all the standards tested on the NYS exams. Additionally, monitoring will come from teacher feedback during data reflection and analysis meetings. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 5  Progress will be assessed by data from assessments indicating levels of mastery. Mastery will be set at 75% for standards mastery. I-Ready and Mastery Connect data will be used as instruments of measure. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Context: Strengths around this Element:  An Advisory program for all students  A Dean of Students along with School Counselors tasked with helping deescalate situations  Annual assembly around Respect for All during student orientation and celebrations around Respect for All Week  Use of the student-created social emotional survey  The Dean of Students, School Counselors, Assistant Principals, and Principal have an open door policy for all students needing to voice a concern Needs around this Element:  Expanded student peer mediation and restorative justice practices  Refining the Advisory curriculum to incorporate more lessons around respect and positive peer interactions  Supporting the school staff in de-escalation techniques Data Sources: 2017-2018 Incident Level and Infraction Summary Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, through a combination of six targeted Advisory lessons, small group counseling by targeted need, and peer conflict resolution sessions, there will be a 7% decrease in the number of B24 and B36 incidents recorded in OORS. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? In conjunction with School Counselors and the Dean’s office, the school will conduct a series of assemblies and invite outside speakers focusing on the theme of respecting each other for students and families. All Students, Parents September 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principals, School Counselors, Parent Coordinator, Parents Family workshops on supporting adolescents express stress in ways that do not include physical altercations. Small group counseling sessions on managing feelings of aggression. Advisory will emphasize respecting your peers, using appropriate language, and managing emotions. The school counselors will conduct lesson on these topic in an expanded curriculum All Students September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, School Counselors, Dean, Parent Coordinator Guest speakers will be invited to speak with classes The school will use honor level in conjunction with field trips, special events, and spirit days to encourage positive student conduct. All Students September 2018 - June 2019 During weekly outreach conducted by teachers and counselors, parents will be asked about their perspective regarding the school environment with particular emphasis on respect and safety. Parents, All students September 2018 - June 2019 Administrators, School Counselors, Dean, Teachers, Parent Coordinator Teachers, Dean, School Counselors, Administrator, Parents, PTA 8  Students will be asked to provide feedback on de-escalation techniques 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. There will be workshops for parents related to supporting conflict resolution and communication strategies throughout the year supported by the Dean, School Counselors, and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: collective buy-in and participation of all school staff in supporting greater positive peer interactions, expanded monitoring by School Counselors on student conduct Instructional Resources: resources to support peer mediation and restorative justice practices Schedule Adjustments: Dean, School Counselors, and Administration meeting times Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The mid-point benchmark will be the February Incident Level and Infraction Summary report. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by the number of B24 and B36 incidents logged into OORS. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: According to feedback during our most recent Quality Review, the use of protocols when analyzing student work is an area of growth. Strength around this Element:  Existing practice of student work analysis in subject teams Need around this Element:  84% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are eager to try new ideas Data Sources: Quality Review 2014-2015, 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, Feedback from Instructional Leads Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 school year, during monthly subject meetings in ELA, Math, Science, and Social Studies, teachers will use three student work assessment protocols to examine samples from each unit of study to ensure normed grading practices with 85% consistency. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Administrators and Instructional leads will identify a selection of student work protocols to be used during subject meetings Teachers Summer 2018 - Fall 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads The strengths and weaknesses of each protocols will be determined to best decide which protocols should be used with varying forms of student work Strategies: Collaboration Administrators and Instructional leads will model various protocols during meetings to facilitate teachers in gaining a familiarity around using them in collaborative practice and how through the use, there is stronger norming of grading practices Teachers Fall 2018 Administrators, Instructional Leads Strategies: Talk Protocols Teachers will provide feedback regarding the use of protocols and work to identify how the practice impacts instruction within their classrooms Administration and Instructional leads will assess what impact the protocols had on norming grading practices by taking a cross-section of student work examples from spring units of study and reviewing the scores students in various classes earned Teachers Ongoing Teachers Teachers Spring 2019 Administrators, Instructional Leads 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Through parent workshops, information about rubric-based grading and grade level expectations will be discussed and reviewed with parents. These workshops will be supported the Parent Coordinator. 1  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Administrators and Instructional leads will need to gain familiarity with various protocols and methods of modeling their practice, teachers receptive and open to the challenge of using protocols to norm grading practices Instructional Resources: Protocols Schedule Adjustments: Allotting time to successfully implement protocols during meeting times Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress Reports (October, December, and May) grades will be studied to determine progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by a cross-section of student work scores aligned to rubrics. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: According to 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, teacher influence on instruction material development and selection were relatively lower scoring areas Strengths around this Element:  93% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are actively trying to improve their teaching  91% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school take responsibility for improving the school Need around this Element:  Greater continuity across classroom practices  84% of teachers responded that a lot or all of the teachers at their school are eager to try new id Data Sources: 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, Feedback from Instructional Leads and other teachers Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During 2018-2019 school year, school leadership will monitor and support increased teachers participation by 20% for learning walks and inter-class visitations with a focus on 3B and 3D according to the Danielson Rubric. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Measure of Teaching Practice results will be examined on a school-wide, grade-wide, and years of teaching experience level to ascertain what key components of the Danielson Framework need to be emphasized Administration June 2018 -Administration Summer 2018 A calendar for learning walk focus will be established A reflection questionnaire will also be prepared Teachers identified as showing particular strength in various components will be approached to reflect on their practice around the component and be invited to help share this strength by serving as an inter-visitation classroom Teachers August 2018 - September 2018 Instructional Leads A schedule for inter-class visitations and learning walks will be posted for teachers to sign up for Teachers September 2018 Administration Administrators will support coverages as needed After each visit or walk, administrators will conduct a reflection session focused on 3b and 3d Administration, Teachers Ongoing Instructional leads, Administration Teachers will identify how the experience will influence their planning and instruction and what additional takeaways were gained on how to develop stronger practices around 3b and 3d. Administration and Instructional leads will take feedback from reflections and use it in subsequent observations and collaborative planning meetings 4  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Families will learn about the ways in which M.S. 244 teachers are growing professionally during Open School week and at monthly PTA meetings. These efforts will be supported by school Administration, Counselors, and the Parent Coordinator. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: Teachers participating in these learning opportunities, Administration allotting time for reflective conversations following each visit Instructional Resources: Resources to identify ways to support greater proficiency in Domain 3 Schedule Adjustments: Allotting time to support learning walks and inter-class visitations Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The midpoint for progress monitoring will be February 2019. Through the use of I-Ready and Mastery Connect, teachers and administrators will be able to analyze progress made up to this point of the year in ELA and Math. Students will be identified through the program as being either on or off track to making a one year gain on either the NYS ELA or Math exams. Target growth is 7% in each assessed standard. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by evidence of takeaways from visits implemented as a new and emerging practice within classrooms of participating teachers and MOTP ratings related to Domain 3. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Context: Building on efforts to increase parent outreach during the past school year, we now seek ways to leverage greater outreach to increase parental involvement in determining what resources are made available to parents. Strengths around this Element:  98% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that the principal/school leader at their school works to create a sense of community in the school  97% of parents/guardians agreed or strongly agreed that they feel well-informed by the communications they receive from their child's school  94% of parents/guardians responded that they are somewhat or very likely to attend a general school meeting or school event (open house, back to school night, play, dance, sports event, or science fair) Needs around this Element:  Attendance at parent workshops was inconsistent  Overall average parent attendance from all workshops during the 2015-2016 was under 20 parents per workshop Data Sources: 2016-2017 School Quality Guide, Anecdotal evidence from Administration, Dean of Students, School Counselors, Teachers, and Office Staff, and Feedback from the PTA/SLT Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, three PTA-sponsored parent workshops will be determined by survey with the expectation that at least 25 parents attend. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Create a mutually agreed upon time line for compiling the list of possible topics and launching the survey PTA, SLT, Guidance Department Summer 2018 PTA, SLT, Guidance Department, Parent Coordinator Determine Guidance Department's in-house expertise on various topics Identify community based organizations to possibly consult with various topics Create list of topics specific to ENLs. and SWDs. Create paper surveys Distribute, collect, and tally results of surveys Parents/Guardians Fall 2018 Share the results with the school community Reach out to parents/guardians to ensure attendance target is met Advertise workshops on take-home flyers, on the school calendar and webpage Make robo and personal calls to parents inviting them to the workshops Parents/Guardians Two weeks prior to each workshop Guidance Department, PTA, Parent Coordinator PTA, SLT, Guidance Department, Parent Coordinator 7 PTA, SLT, Guidance Department, Administration At the conclusion of each workshop PTA, SLT, Guidance Department, Administration, Parent Coordinator Evaluated methods of parent/guardian communication and impact of workshops Solicit feedback from parents/guardians after each workshop on usefulness of the information shared Share findings with school community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Hispanic Federation, NYC Health Services, the Park Avenue Armory Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources : Health Educators from St. Barnabas, Workshop facilitators from organizations such as CUNY, and the Bronx District Attorney Office Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA Title II, Part A SIG X PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Survey results will be one indication of progress towards meeting this goal as will attendance at the parent workshops. Mid-year (late January) parents will be reissued new surveys that will inform us what issues parents still feel the school needs to address. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Progress will be measured by results of survey participants and the number of parents attending workshops. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) After-school ELA Small group During the school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Below proficiency onNYS ELA exam Mathematics Below proficiency onNYS Math exam Science Social Studies Below proficiency onNYS ELA exam Below proficiency onNYS ELA exam enrichment, Saturday Academy After-school Math enrichment, Saturday Academy Small group After-school Science Small group enrichment After school ELA enrichmentandSaturday Academy day, before and after school During the school day, before and after school After School School/Saturday Academy During the school day, before and after school Small group After At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Below proficiency onNYS ELA and Math Advisory,Afterschool Small group, one-to-one exam, Absences enrichment programs 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) Currently, there are 137 students in temporary housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. Services provided to the STH population include: student counseling, parent outreach, supplies (uniforms, school supplies, books, and glasses) and support accessing resources. Students will also be provided with school supplies, school uniforms, and winter accessories. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. M.S. 244 understands the importance of having highly qualified teachers to provide students with the best possible educational experience. With this in mind, when recruiting teachers, M.S. 244 seeks out individuals who possess an enthusiasm for middle school students and can offer a personalized touch to their instruction. We also pride ourselves in enabling teachers to bring their own special talents and hobbies to the students through after school sessions which have spawned classes such as sewing, a STEP team, and a culinary arts program. The school has a relatively high retention rate which we believe is testament to a strong instructional core and the multitude of opportunities for professional development in pedagogy and content. Support for new and veteran teachers alike is provided through peer coaching and mentoring in their respective subject areas. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). When considering teacher professional development at M.S. 244, an important practice in our community is reflecting on insights both classroom observations and teacher feedback surrounding professional development has provided the Administration team. This information, qualitative and quantitative, is the cornerstone for developing our teacher professional development calendar. One important source of data guiding this work is the Measure of Teacher Practice scores. These scores, aligned to components in the Danielson Framework, enable the Administrative team to consider the greatest areas of need for teacher development. Another source comes from one-to-one coaching sessions teachers have with their supervising Administrator, mentor, or instructional leads during which professional goals are discussed and a plan of action is developed. Professional development for the Administration team comes from reflection on areas of focus from the Quality Review. 2  Paraprofessional professional development led by our IEP Teacher and tailored to support the needs of students with IEPs. Moreover, paraprofessionals are invited to join along in teacher professional development to supplement their own instructional knowledge when working with students. Staff professional development is provided through the various union affiliates in an effort to expand and strengthen their instructional practice. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers collaborate on assessments during our interim assessments cycles. These conversations are led by both the ELA and Math Instrucional Leads who work with teacher teams to examine trends in data and identify assessments that best align to focus areas covered within a given unit. Professional development for teachers is based on input from teachers and observational data by leadership. Feedback from professional development is solicited from teachers to better ascertain the impact. Teachers provide the administration with recommendations on assessment usage and collaborate on communicating the decisions made with families. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools 3  Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 772,683.00 0 21,710.00 0 5,350,336.00 X X x X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., 4  semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. M.S. 244, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. M.S. 244 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students  Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology;  providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and  decision making in support of the education of their children; fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress;  providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments;  sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand;  providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community 6  Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will:  Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact;  engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills;  ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and  strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills;  maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;   provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help    Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by:  Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference;  hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year;  encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 7  supporting or hosting Family Day events;   establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents;  encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers;  providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress  developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress;  providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) M.S. 244, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  Using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships  Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be    discussed as well as how this Compact is related; convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education;  providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;   providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information;  ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 8  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff  Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents;  notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff  member; arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities;  planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents  Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful   environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents;   ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as  described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 9  ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities  Attend school regularly and arrive on time;      complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; show respect for myself, other people and property; try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; always try my best to learn 0 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 1  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials NYS ELA Proficiency Levels NYSESLAT Levels&nbsp; Reading and Writing Baseline results administered in the month of September Begin description here: Our Title III program focuses primarily on improving student reading and writing abilities as demonstrated by results on the NYSESLAT and the NYS ELA exam. Students are expected to move in proficiency by at least .15 on the NYS ELA exam and/or move in level on the NYSESLAT. The following data is analyzed in order to determine groupings as well as what specific reading and writing skills need to be addressed: · · · During our Saturday ELL Academy, students work in small groups as determined by their English proficiency level. Teacher provide direct instruction using various resources. This program services grades 6-8 and meets every Saturday from 8:30 am - 12:30 pm. All ELL and former ELLs are encouraged to participate. Students work with ELA, ESL, and Math teachers who focus on improving English reading and writing skills. Teachers use the following programs/resources: 1) Rehearsing for Common Core Standards by Rally 2) Discovery Education 3) i-Ready 4) Junior Scholastic 5) Finish Line ELLS During Saturday Academy, teachers provide direction instruction for two hours per group serviced. Thus, students take part in two hours of ESL/ELA and two hours of Math. Instruction is in both English for ELA/ESL and Native Language (Spanish) for Math. rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: The following professional development and support will be available to all Title III teachers and other staff responsible for the delivery of instruction and services to our ELL population: · · · · · · · year on formative assessment and student engagement. &nbsp; Teachers will receive professional development as follow: 1. During our Monday collaboration sessions, staff members meet with members of our counseling department and school leadership team to discuss how to integrate lessons with real Discovery Education&nbsp; i-Ready training DOE sponsored professional development for ELL Instruction SmartTeq training in order to &nbsp;integrate technology Understanding ELLs (Once a month during Monday's PD from 2:35 - 3:50 pm)&nbsp; LCI&nbsp;Facilitated workshops on formative assessments Generation Ready facilitated workshops every Monday for the first 12 Mondays of the 2  Part C: Professional Development life experiences. In addition, staff are supported with materials (high school directories, audition procedures, and testing samples) discussing high school opportunities. 2. Our Bilingual Guidance Counselor actively works with ELLs and their parents/guardians through the high school articulation process and conferencing with ELL teachers on how they can assist students during this transition. 3. Discovery Education and i-Ready trainings and lesson planning will take place throughout the school year. Training will be focused on supporting teachers on how to monitor student comprehension, use the program to plan whole class lessons, individualize instruction, and closely analyze the data to plan for next instructional steps. 4. LCI and Generation Ready training are specific to student engagement and formative assessment to better prepare teachers to engage students through questioning and meaningful tasks and how best to assess student comprehension. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: For the ELL population, we provide the survey in the language as identify by the Home Language Identification Survey and translation in all workshops. The school understands that our ELL population may encounter language and cultural barriers which need to be addressed. Therefore, our ELL parents are provided additional workshops addressing such related topics as parenting a bilingual or ESL student. 2. Our school partners with several CBOs that provide workshops to the entire school community. CBOs provide our families with useful information on subjects such as: immigration, finding resources in a new country, learning English and resume writing. We also partnered with The Hispanic Federation to host workshops for parents on what they need to do now to prepare their child for college. The workshops are in English and Spanish and address issues regarding those whose legal status is still in process and what college options they have. 3. Workshops offered through the school supported by the school counselors and staff include: Learning more about the middle school curriculum and ENL servicing, Understanding the path from Middle School to High School, What is the NYSESLAT?, and How to Support Your Child During Adolescence. Additionally, we offer several parent and teen communication workshops to discuss topics such as: How to communicate with your teen, interpersonal relationships, and peer pressure. 4. Parental involvement activities are frequently changed as a result of the surveys, parent meetings, and changes in school population. 5. The school is committed in supporting parents/guardians in developing literacy skills. A series of literacy workshops such as ESL classes, developing NLA reading and writing skills will be offered for all interested parents/guardians. In addition, parents have been invited to attend computer classes with the focus of improving basic computer skills, resume writing, and career development. Activities are identified at the beginning of the school year through surveys distributed during parent meetings, PTA and school leadership meetings. 3 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Teachers will be paid per-session during the NSLA. Saturday Academy. Teachers will be paid for 16 Saturdays. Once the Title III Funds have been used in total, then other Per Session lines will be used to cover the cost N/A Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Per session Per diem $17598.40 Purchased services 1. High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. N/A Supplies and materials 2. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Must be supplemental. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. 3. 4. Supplementary materials that will be purchased for ELL students: Finish Line E.L.A, pens, pencils, notebooks N/A N/A N/A N/A $4111.60 N/A N/A N/A $21,710 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name The New School for Leadership & The Arts Borough Bronx School Number 244 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Eduardo Mora Coach Lisa Kuinlan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Mario Reyes Teacher/Subject Area Jose Cabral (Math) Teacher/Subject Area Maritza Dorta (Spanish) Related-Service Provider Nancy Acosta Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal A. Stout Coach Aida Wade School Counselor Acosta Nancy Parent Valerie Torres Parent Coordinator Hector Garcia Field Support Center Staff Member Ms. Sling de la Cruz Other (Name and Title) Test C: Ms. Luke C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 3 4 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 3 1 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 2 2 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 2 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 773 5 Total number of ELLs 154 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 19.92%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): N/A Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 4 3 2 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 10 11 12 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 Tot # 3 0 0 0 0 0 3 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? We use a variety of assessment tools to evaluate or assess the literacy skills of our ELL students. These assessments tools include but are not limited to: teacher made assessments, department unit tests, Common Core performance tasks, Fountas and Pinnell Benchmark Assessments, grades K-8 among other informal assessments. These assessments provide meaningful academic insights for every student. We are able to calculate students' reading (fluency) and comprehension level. Informal writing assessments provide teachers with grammar and writing mechanics insights that are later used to drive and differentiate Instruction. At the beginning of the school year, every student is assigned a portfolio that is systematically updated by the teacher and is use to track the students' progress in literacy. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The structures that support the implementation of formative assessments in our school are as follows: 6  *Making data a part of the permanent cycle of instructional improvement; * Having programmed baseline tests, department unit tests, Common Core performance tests, ; *Teaching students to examine their own data and set learning goals; *Establishing a clear vision for school wide data use; *Providing support that foster a data-driven culture-with in the school; *Maintaining a strong school-district data system. The tools use in this process include a variety of templates, student goal-setting worksheets student surveys and research plans, these tools are available to each teacher, parent, or student to help us implement better instructional practices in our different classes throughout the school. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The success of our programs are evaluated based on the NYSESLAT and State Exams scores. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our different departments have scheduled meetings: grade meetings, individualized teachers meetings to discuss students' weaknesses and strengths. We align our teaching instructions to students' needs with additional resources and feedback. Teachers also use this data to drive their lessons providing reinforcement for low performers through mini-lessons, small group instruction, pairing advance and struggling students and homework. This data is also use in after- school programs as well as in our Saturday Academy Program. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our school understands the importance of creating a strong Response to Intervention (RTI) model in order to provide ELLs with rigorous, culturally responsive instruction. We provide additional academic support to all ELLs who scored below specified levels of performance on the annual English language proficiency assessment. The academic support services we provide for ELLs are in direct alignment with school wide Academic Intervention Services. We use the data provided from various assessments to determine the individual instructional support needed for students to be academically successful. As highlighted on the RTI guidelines, our students are provided with the increasingly intensive, targeted instruction designed to match their learning needs as demonstrated by the results of multiple assessments. Instructional support offered at our school include but are not limited to: rigorous and evidence-based curriculum focusing on English Language development for ELLs, activities and experience targeted to specific students based on assessments results in addition to the core instruction, a small percentage of students are in need of intensive and individualized instruction (small group or even 1:1, in order to meet their academic needs). 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. After a careful analysis of the NYSESLAT across proficiency levels and grades, the data reveals that there is a fluctuating pattern across NYSESLAT levels in the different grades. The data reveals that the highest percentage of students score at the entering and expanding level across grades. It can further be concluded that the percentage of 6 th and 7 th grades scoring at the expanding level was greater than the percentage of 6 th and 7 th grade students scoring at the entering, emerging, transitioning and commanding levels. For examples, 48% of all 6 th graders scored at the expanding level, 36 % of the 6 th graders scored at the entering level, 8% of 6 th graders scored at the transitioning level and 0% scored at the commanding level, resulting in more 6 th grade students scoring at the expanding level than at any other level. We were able to notice a similar pattern in the 7 th grade. 46% of the 7 th graders scored at the expanding level, 39% of the 7 th graders scored at the entering level, 11% of the 7 th graders scored at the transitioning level and 0% at the commanding level. The 7 th grade data analysis reveals that there were more 7 th graders scoring at the expanding level than at any other level. It is worth noting that the second highest percentage of 6 th and 7 th grades scored at the entering level, creating a significant gap between one side of the spectrum to the next. The inverse phenomenon occurred with the 8 th graders, having (42%) the highest number of 8 7  th graders scoring at the entering level. 36% of the 8 th graders scoring at the expanding level, 12% of the 8 th graders scoring at the transitioning level and finally having 10% of the 8 th graders scoring at the emerging level, resulting in having the highest percentage of 8 th grade students scoring at the entering level The data shows that the highest percentage of ELL students scored on the expanding level, followed by the second highest percentage scoring at the entering level, the remaining ELL students scored between emerging and transitioning level. One can further conclude based on the data that a significant number of ELL students scoring at the entering level are classified as newcomers to the country. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? In our school administrators and teachers know that student achievement data offers invaluable support for making good decisions about instructional programs. With the use of Engrade, on time progress reports , parents orientation, and individual conferences with students, we provide explicit instruction for our students and parents in constantly using achievement data to monitor the student learning performance and establishing learning goals. Our school has a data analysis team that evaluate summative assessments and provides teachers and administrators with specific findings that allows teacher to adjust their instruction to address students' needs. Our school use the Engrade progress report, parents orientations and individual conference with students to disseminate students' summative performance. Based on this results the school data team make suggestion in how to adjust and improve our academic programs. This can be done due to the fact that teachers and administrators have made data analysis part of an ongoing cycle of instructional improvement. We know that collaboration among teachers in each step of the data based inquiry process maximize the benefits of data use by helping teachers share effective practices, gain a deeper understanding of students' needs, and develop improved instructional programs as well as effective strategies to better serve our students. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The freestanding English as a New Language (ENL) program provides instruction in English with Home Language support, emphasizing English acquisition. This program consists of a combination of Stand-alone ENL and Integrated ENL instruction. Stand-alone English as a New Language is instruction to support and develop English Language Skills focusing on the key domain of writing, reading, listening and speaking. This instruction is delivered by a certified ENL teacher. Integrated ENL is another method that we provide ENL services in a freestanding ENL program. Integrated ENL consists of instruction to build English Language Skills through content area instruction. It is delivered by a dually certified content area teacher ( ENL and a content area). Both methods of instruction require content area subject matter and English Language development using ENL strategies. Students are grouped based on proficiency levels. b. TBE program. If applicable. Transitional Bilingual Education is a program designed so that students develop conceptual skills in their home language as they learn English. All instruction is aligned with Common Core standards to accelerate student achievement. Students are grouped based on proficiency levels. Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science are taught in the student's native language. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 8  2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In an attempt to ensure that our staff adhere to the mandated number of units of ENL support for ELLs in our school, bilingual teachers along with ENL providers are given class schedules to follow for the school year. These schedules are developed based on the mandated instructional minutes stated in NYS CR 154. ELA and NLA instructional minutes are scheduled within the class instructional programs, and these subjects are delivered through a departmentalized model. The ENL support service on the other hand is delivered through a combination of instructional models, which include: stand-alone and integrated ENL. Each ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minute is determined and delivered in each program based on the student's NYSESLAT proficiency level. ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional units are determined based on the NYSESLAT proficiency level. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Our TBE content areas are delivered using a departmentalized model. These content areas are taught in students' native language and a variety of instructional approaches are used to support content comprehension and language enrichment development. These approaches include but are not limited to: the usage of technology to enhance students learning experience, translation of key terms from L1 to L2, field trips to ensure hands on experience, project-based learning, and assessments. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? To ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages, teacher-created diagnostic baseline assessments are developed by all content area teachers at the beginning of the school year. These content area assessments are administered to all TBE students in their native languages and for students participating in the Freestanding ENL programs, they are given the opportunity to take their assessments in the language of their choice. Throughout the school year, TBE students are systematically administered content area unit tests in their native language. These assessments are created as a result of continual collaboration among ENL, Bilingual, and monolingual teachers along with the administrators. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Our SIFE students have the opportunity to experience an array of instructional strategies and educational support. Some of these instructional strategies include stand alone services for small groups, providing specific students with small group instruction in order to maximize learning and to strengthen weak areas. SIFE students are also active participants of the after school academic programs that focus on project base instruction. This year we adopted various academic literacy and mathematics instructional programs to support the different ELL sub-groups. These programs include iReady, Ready NY, Vocabulary for Success, Finish Line ELA, i-Lit, Rally! Rehearsal ELA, and JR Scholastic to name a few. Our plan for ELLs in US schools less than three years (newcomers) is to continue the ELL Saturday Academy and after school academic programs designed specifically for newcomers, with the purpose of providing additional academic services on Saturdays and after school. Teachers in the Saturday academy use a variety of instructional approaches to enrich language development. Some of these approaches include, but are not limited to: the use of technology to enhance students learning experience, field trips to get hands on experience and translation of key terms from L1 to L2. The Fast For Word program is also being used with the newcomers to help them improve their decoding and reading fluency. 9  Long-term ELL students will receive a series of instructional support which will enable them to progress in their English proficiency. They will receive ELA instruction as well as ENL services as part of their class schedules. AIS and ENL teachers will target at-risk students focusing on long-term ELLs. Teachers assess students in order to identify individual deficiencies and then plan programs to strengthen their skills. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Our plan for ELLs identified as having special needs is to provide them with ENL services as well as special education services. Students will receive small group instruction based on their individual needs. The ENL teacher will be responsible for providing additional support for language acquisition while the special education teacher concentrates on the student’s individual needs as specified in the IEP. These students are also encouraged to participate in additional academic after school and co-curricular programs to strengthen their language skills. NLA, ELA, ENL, and Special Education teachers meet regularly to collaborate and develop academic units that are in alignment with Common Core standards. During these meetings, teachers share instructional strategies and ENL teaching methodology to accelerate English language development for ELLs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use grade-level materials to support instruction and use videos, audios and translations of key terms from L1 to L2 as a way to support student comprehension. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our plan for ELLs identified as having special needs is to provide them with ENL services as well as special education services. Students will receive small group instruction based on their individual needs. The ENL teacher will be responsible for providing additional support for language acquisition while the special education teacher concentrates on the student’s individual needs as specified in the IEP. These students are also encouraged to participate in additional academic after school and extracurricular programs to strengthen their language skills. NLA, ELA , ENL, and Special ed teachers meet regularly to collaborate and develop academic units that are in alignment with Common Core standards. During these meetings, teachers share instructional strategies and ENL teaching methodology to accelerate English language development for ELLs. Teachers of ELL-SWDs use grade-level materials to support instruction and use videos, audios, and translation of key terms from L1 to L2 as a way to support student comprehension. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Understanding the importance of creating an effective RTI model to support ELLs is key in determining the academic success of the ELL population. We have adopted several instructional suggestions and research-based intervention practices recommended by the DOE in creating a RTI model for ELLs' academic success. We use Tier 1instructional strategies which is instruction that is focused on promoting language and literacy development. It promotes the development of key domains in literacy, to support competencies in reading, writing, listening and speaking. These key domains are developed in ELA, ENL, HLA and other core content areas. There is ongoing use of instructional strategies such as building student's oral language skills by teaching specialized vocabulary and the different structure of language in academic speech. ELLs written language is supported by the development of instruction that connects the ways in which students and their families use literacy at home and in the community. Our teachers provide different types of writing tools in the classroom, they guide students' early writing by co-constructing predictable and rhythmic books. Phonemic awareness is one of the key factors in supporting students as they develop reading skills. Our teacher focus on the identification of the skills that student already know in their home language and in English. Explicit instruction will then be provided for students with low levels of phonemic awareness. Effective learning activities that teachers use include but are not limited to singing songs, playing word games , reading and re-reading poems, shared reading choral reading etc. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? This year, we adopted several programs including but not limited to: i-Ready, Ready NY, Code X, BrainPOP ESL, Vocabulary for Success, Finish Line ELA, Rally! Rehearsal ELA, Junior Scholastic, Progress Math, Finish Line Math 0  10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? N/A 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We offer an array of academic and extracurricular after school programs for all students. These programs include, but are not limited to: Morning Arts (Dance, Visual Arts and Band), African Drumming and Dance, Chorus, Girls' Basketball, Soccer, Flag Football, ELA Intensive, Math Intensive, Honors Math and ELA program, Honors Bilingual ELA and Math program, Homework Help/Computer Research, Girls Leadership International, Boys Kane Team, Girls Blue Diamonds, Gamestar Mechanics, College Prep, Saturday Academy and Saturday ELL Academy. Parents are informed about these program via fliers, monthly calendars, phone calls, e-newsletter, and parent orientations. Parents are encouraged to attend workshops in technology, curriculum, and school operations, and we also encourage parents to join our parent organizations such as School Leadership Team and the Parent Teacher Association. Many of our parents and their children attend our parent communication workshops facilitated by a distinguished Cornell University professor and The Bronx Teen Health Center at St. Barnabas Hospital. We anticipate expanding our efforts to promote family literacy. If funding is available we would like to open an English class for parents. We feel that family literacy is one of the most effective supports that we can provide for our ELL students. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. All classrooms are equipped with functional SMARTboard and each student has been assigned a mini computer for their individual use. For the past four years, teachers have received on-going SMARTboard training and are expected to utilize technology in their everyday lessons and subject instructions. In addition, our school was has adopted the i-Lit literacy computer program exclusively designed to improve reading fluency in ELLs. Every LEP student in the TBE program has been assigned specific periods during the school day to participate in the I-Lit Program. ELLs placed in a transitional bilingual program for the first year receive texts in their native language While 2-3 year newcomers are a placed in a TBE program receive text books in both languages ( Home Language and in English). They also receive explicit ENL instruction during specified ENL periods. ELLs placed in a Free-Standing ENL program receive the same textbooks (in English) as non ELLs students on the same grade. In addition to the texts, ENL teachers provide supplemental material such as graphic organizers, adapted texts, highlighted texts and other resources in the student's native language All staff members receive professional development focusing on strategies to improve instruction for English Language Learners. Faculty members are trained on how to make content more comprehensible through the use of visual aides, graphic organizers, adapted text and other supplemental materials. Our school is working with the entire staff to create an ideal learning environment for our ELLs. Monolingual teachers regularly attend conferences and workshops that focus on teaching ELLs. In addition, the bilingual and ENL teachers work with the monolingual teachers to create inclusive lessons for ELL students 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We are currently servicing approximately seventy LEP students in the TBE program. These students are divided into two groups; First year in the country and two-three years in the country. ELLs falling into the first category receive text books and instruction in their native language. They also receive explicit ESL instruction during specified ENL periods. ELLs falling into the second category also receive text books in their native language as well as in English with instruction varying in percentage based on their NYSESLAT scores and English proficiency levels. LEP students placed in the Free-Standing ENL program receive have the option of receiving a copy of the text books in their native language. In addition to the texts, ENL teachers provide supplemental material such as graphic organizers, adapted texts, highlighted texts, and other resources in the student's native language. As stated before, all staff members receive professional development specifically to improve instruction for English language learners. Faculty members are trained on how to make content more comprehensible through the use of visual aides, graphic organizers, adapted text, translation and interpretation computer programs and other supplemental 1  materials. Our school is working with the entire staff to create an ideal learning environment for our ELLs. Monolingual teachers regularly attend conferences and workshops that focus on teaching ELLs. In addition, the bilingual and ENL teachers work with the monolingual teachers to create inclusive lessons for ELL students. The ENL and bilingual teachers are currently in the process of improving our ELL library sections. We currently have a number of texts in both English and Spanish. These libraries are leveled allowing our ELLs to choose a book based on readiness. The ENL and bilingual teachers at our school are a part of our literacy department. Having the department organized in this fashion allows for maximum communication between the ELL teachers and the Language Arts teachers. Students' ENL and Language Arts teachers closely monitor the progress of the transitioning students. If a student struggles during this transitional period, additional support is provided through either push in or pull out ENL services. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Students at the Entering and Emerging level receive a minimum of 360 minutes of ENL instruction per week. 180 minutes ENL service for ELLs scoring Entering is delivered as Stand Alone in ENL/ELA and 180 minutes per week as a flexible combination of 180 minutes per week of Stand Alone ENL instruction or integrated ENL in content area. Students scoring at the Emerging level receive 90 minutes per week of Stand Alone ENL services, 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/ ELA services, and 90 minutes of stand alone or integrated ENL/content area. ELL students in the transitioning level receive 180 minutes of ENL services. 90 minutes per week as integrated ENL/ content are and 90 minutes per week as stand alone or integrated ENL/content area. Students at the Expanding level receive 180 minutes per week of integrated ENL/content area. Students performing at the commanding level receive 90 minutes per week of integrated ENL/content for an additional two years. The units of ENL instruction our students receive is in compliance with the mandated number of minutes required under CR Part 154. ELLs in the mainstream classroom are grouped into classes according to their English Proficiency. This allows for students with similar need to receive ENL instruction in the same setting. Explicit ENL instruction is delivered as a class in the transitional bilingual program and through the Stand Alone model in the monolingual classrooms. During the Stand Alone sessions explicit ENL instruction is delivered. Explicit ENL instruction plays an important role in the teaching of our students. During Stand Alone sessions, a safe environment is created where students can practice, interact, discuss, and experiment with the English language. Teachers scaffold speaking, listening, reading and writing instruction to improve skills with developmentally suitable activities that facilitate transition into higher level academic tasks. During the Collaborative sessions the ENL teacher goes into the Language Arts classroom to provide additional support for the ELLs. This instruction follows the SIOP model where both a content goal and language goal are created by the ENL teacher and the teacher provides supplemental material in the form of rewritten texts, highlighted texts, key vocabulary sheets, graphic organizers, and other suitable materials aimed at making content more comprehensible for the English language learners. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? All classrooms are equiped with functional SMARTboard and each student has been assigned a mini computer for their individual use. For the past four years, teachers have received on-going SMARTboard training and are expected to utilize technology in their everyday lessons and subject instructions. In addition, our school was has adopted the i-Lit literacy computer program exclusively designed to improve reading fluency in ELLs. Every LEP student in the TBE program has been assigned specific periods during the school day to participate in the I-Lit Program. ELLs placed in a transitional bilingual program for the first year receive texts in their native language While 2-3 year newcomers are a placed in a TBE program receive text books in both languages ( Home Language and in English). They also receive explicit ENL instruction during specified ENL periods. ELLs placed in a Free-Standing ENL program receive the same textbooks (in English) as non ELLs students on the same grade. In addition to the texts, ENL teachers provide supplemental material such as graphic organizers, adapted texts, highlighted texts and other resources in the student's native language All staff members receive professional development focusing on strategies to improve instruction for English Language Learners. Faculty members are trained on how to make content more comprehensible through the use of visual aides, graphic organizers, adapted text and other supplemental materials. Our school is working with the entire staff to create an ideal learning environment for our ELLs. Monolingual teachers regularly attend conferences and workshops that focus on teaching ELLs. In addition, the bilingual and ENL teachers work with the monolingual teachers to create inclusive lessons for ELL students 2  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our newly enrolled ELL students are scheduled to meet with a school staff member before they begin the school year. The purpose of this meeting is to introduce students to their teachers and to get them familiar with the building. They are introduced to a classmate who will meet them on their first day of school and walk with them for the first week. During this meeting students are given a class schedule, a list of school supplies and they receive information about school uniform and policies. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We are offering Spanish this year. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The following professional development and support will be available to all staff members this school year --- DOE sponsored professional development e.g. BETAC ----SmartTeq training in order to integrate technology in the instruction of ELLs In- house P.Ds will include -- Understanding ELLs SWD ---Testing Accommodation for ELLs RtI Professional development During assigned Monday collaboration sessions, staff members meet with members of our counseling department and school leadership team to discuss how to integrate lessons with real life experiences. In addition, staff are supported with materials (high school directories, audition procedures, and testing samples) discussing the high school opportunities for all our ELL, special education, and general education students. Attendance sheets are distributed after every session and are kept in the ELL supervisor's office. During assigned Monday collaboration sessions, staff members meet with members of our counseling department and school leadership team to discuss how to integrate lessons with real life experiences. In addition, staff are supported with materials (high school directories, audition procedures, and testing samples) discussing the high school opportunities for all our ELL, special education, and general education students. Attendance sheets are distributed after every session and are kept in the ELL supervisor's office. Our school provides professional development to all teachers and administrators that specifically addresses the needs of English language learners. These sessions are dedicated to language acquisition, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. For all bilingual and English as a new language teachers, professional development hours are dedicated to language acquisition in alignment with core content area instruction, including a focus on best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. 3  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our Bilingual and monolingual Guidance Counselors are actively working with ELLs and their parents as ELL students through the high school articulation process. Counselors are also constantly conferencing with teachers of ELLs on how they can assist students during this transition and on how to provide the appropriate academy support to help the ELLs succeed academically. In an effort to prepare school counselors to provide the best service and guidance to teachers, parents and students, our school has form partnerships with St. Barnabas Hospital, Mosholu Montefiore Community Center, CICU (Commission of Independent College and Universities) and other organizations to give counselors the opportunity to participate in various professional development training such as: How to Help Students to be Successful in Post-Secondary Education, Kids2College, How to Communicate with your Child, Child Abuse and other PD pertaining to the academic success of ELLs. Our school organizes and facilitates professional development to all teachers and administrators that are directly involved in addressing the needs of ELLs. These PD are focused on developing and supporting language acquisition in ELLs, Understanding the academic needs of ELLs, Best Practices for co-teaching strategies and the integration of language and content instruction for ELLs. Some of these PD. will be facilitated by the Peer Collaborative ELA and Math teachers. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? To discuss program goals, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results and language development needs in all content areas, with parents of ELLs, the school has assigned school counselors to schedule ongoing meetings during the school year to keep parents informed. Teachers are assigned to use Tuesday extended time for parent outreach. Interpretation and translation is available to parents and teachers when needed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. At the beginning of the school year, parents are asked to participate in a survey. The parent survey lists topics which support parents with their child's academic needs. The topics are selected through meetings held throughout the prior school year from the School Leadership Team and the Parent Association. Parents are also asked to list any topics that are not mentioned in the survey to better meet their needs. In addition, parents are asked when is the best time to conduct workshops. The school understands that our ELL population may encounter language and culture barriers which need to be addressed. Therefore, these ELL parents are provided additional workshops addressing such related topics as supporting a bilingual or ESL student. In addition, ELL parents are encouraged to volunteer in all school activities. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Eduardo Mora, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: M.S. 244 School DBN: 10X244 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Eduardo Mora Title Principal Austin Stout Assistant Principal Aurora Hernandez Parent Coordinator Jose Cabral ENL/Bilingual Teacher Valerie Torres Parent Aida Wade Lisa Kuinlan Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Nancy Acosta School Counselor Maribel Hulla Ms. Sling de la Cruz Mario Reyes Gil Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other ENL Coordinator Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 6/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 06/27/17 06/27/17 06/27/17 a1/1/01 06/27/17 06/27/17 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X244 School Name: The New School for Leadership and T Superintendent: MaribelHulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Lang. Access Coordinator Bilingual School Counselor IEP Coordinator Yes No No Yes Yes Yes Mario Nancy Eva Reyes Acosta Rivera * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The primary tool our school uses in the assessment for prefer language of communication with parents is, the HLIS format which during registration is provided to parents. Our school also uses the RCPL and RAPL from the ATS format to revise the preferred language of our students' parents. It shows the parents preference written and oral language and allowed staff members better communication with parents. We also have the Blue Cards or Emergency contact cards which requires that parents state their preferred written and oral language. This information is constantly updated into the ATS which allow us to have better communication with students' immediate family members. At the same time, our school constantly uses surveys such as: Language Line "Hello 8  Parents"; Language Access Parent Survey; School Staff Language Survey; Over the Phone Interpreter Services:(Desk Aid); and the Multi-Language Fliers. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Spanish English Italian Arabic 568 486 4 3 52.94 45.29 0.37 0.28 570 483 4 2 53.12 45.01 0.37 0.28 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families IEPs September- June School Health Parental Consent Form September or during registration How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. We use the Translation and Interpretation Unit from the schools.nyc.gov website as well as the school Language Access team. For translation of written School Health Consent Form and Documents about the School Based Health Center we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit from the schools.nyc.gov website as well as the school Language Access team. At the same time, we review new documents and revise existing documents, to determine if they remain vital or if other documents are identified for translation purposes. We use or have available for translation, the following resources: Through DOE 9  Letters from the Principal, Event Letters, Letter Specific for a Child, Newsletters. September or during registration After school Forms, documents and parents' letters. September or during registration have contract with language service vendors. We also created a list of individuals that have the capacity of oral translations of written documents such as bilingual staff members. At the same time Language Access Coordinator maintains the list of written translation resources available to staff, including: Name and contact information for all resources, names of staff members who are available to provide oral translations of written documents. For translation of documents created by the Principal such as; letters, event letters, letter specific for a child, and newsletters, we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit from the schools.nyc.gov website as well as the school Language Access team. At the same time, we review new documents and revise existing documents, to determine if they remain vital or if other documents are identified for translation purposes. We use or have available for translation, the following resources: Through DOE have contract with language service vendors. We also created a list of individuals that have the capacity of oral translations of written documents such as bilingual staff members. At the same time Language Access Coordinator maintains the list of written translation resources available to staff, including: Name and contact information for all resources, names of staff members who are available to provide oral translations of written documents For after school forms, documents and parents’ letters, we use the Translation and Interpretation Unit from the schools.nyc.gov website as well as the school Language Access team. At the same time, we review new documents and revise existing documents, to determine if they remain vital or if other documents are identified for translation purposes. We use or have available for translation, the following resources: Through DOE have contract with language service 0  vendors. We also created a list of individuals that have the capacity of oral translations of written documents such as bilingual staff members. At the same time Language Access Coordinator maintains the list of written translation resources available to staff, including: Name and contact information for all resources, names of staff members who are available to provide oral translations of written documents. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? For in person to person encounters, we use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. When LEP individual cannot self-identify, or, where staff is unable to communicate with LEP parents, staff uses “I Speak” cards and “If you need an interpreter” desk aid. For pre-planned appointments with LEP individuals, we have already identified an individual’s language need and made the necessary arrangements through the interpretation contractor. The Language Access Coordinator is in charge of maintaining a list of oral interpreting resources. We use, or have available for oral interpreting the following resources: a list of number of staff and languages spoken, name of vendors, names and contact information of these resources, and procedures for accessing interpreters and services. For Parents’ Orientation Meetings, we use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages Registration Week September Parents' Orientation Meeting. September 1  Parent Teacher Conf. November, March, May NYC Open Schools Week November when needed. For pre-planned appointments with LEP individuals, we have already identified an individual’s language need and made the necessary arrangements through the interpretation contractor. The Language Access Coordinator is in charge of maintaining a list of oral interpreting resources. We use, or have available for oral interpreting the following resources: a list of number of staff and languages spoken, name of vendors, names and contact information of these resources, and procedures for accessing interpreters and services. For Parent Teacher Conferences, we use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. When LEP individual may self-identify, or, where staff is unable to communicate with LEP parents, staff uses “I Speak” cards and “If you need an interpreter” desk aid. For pre-planned appointments with LEP individuals, we have already identified an individual’s language need and made the necessary arrangements through the interpretation contractor. The Language Access Coordinator is in charge of maintaining a list of oral interpreting resources. We use, or have available for oral interpreting the following resources: a list of number of staff and languages spoken, name of vendors, names and contact information of these resources, and procedures for accessing interpreters and services. For NYC Open Schools Week, we use DOE Intranet template(s) for covered languages; we use school-based personnel and/or translation vendor for non-covered languages when needed. When LEP individual may self-identify, or, where staff is unable to communicate with LEP parents, staff uses “I Speak” cards and “If you need an interpreter” desk aid. For pre-2  planned appointments with LEP individuals, we have already identified an individual’s language need and made the necessary arrangements through the interpretation contractor. The Language Access Coordinator is in charge of maintaining a list of oral interpreting resources. We use, or have available for oral interpreting the following resources: a list of number of staff and languages spoken, name of vendors, names and contact information of these resources, and procedures for accessing interpreters and services 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the case of emergencies our school uses the following strategies: Instant-phone messages, Letter Home, E-mail using Engrade, School CNXT and through the school website. At the same time our school uses the Language Line to inform parents they can call the school in their language (use a phone script) - Train staff to use the 3-way call system to add Language Line to incoming calls. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Language Access Coordinator (Mr. M. Reyes) will turnkey training on language access to all staff members. Administrators ensure that every staff member are knowledgeable of the distribution of Language Line Information. Our educational plan is develop in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to ensure that our educational goals are aligned with the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. To ensure that these policies and procedures are implemented in our school we perform annual reviews. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school understands that Limited- English Proficient parents need to become aware of their right to receive adequate information that enhances engagement of these parents in their children’s education. Therefore, we are 3  determined to publicize and inform all LEP parents of the variety of tools and resources available at the school and district level. Information concerning the availability of and free access to such resources are displayed in visible areas of our school. These displays include forms such as; Multilingual Posters, Language ID Guide and Parent Guide to Language Access, Brochures, Booklets, Recruitment Information, etc. These forms will be displayed in appropriate languages use by our LEP parents. Resources also include calling procedures for Language Line, a quick start guide for Parent Notifications, Procedures for requesting interpretation or translation services, and web-based resources and more. Our school also maintains documentation of each LEP individual’s language assistance needs as follows: Monitoring and reporting system that tracks interactions with LEP individuals based on type of activity held and, review of requests for interpretation assistance and translation of specific document. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Our school understands that gathering feedback from limited-English-proficient parents is critical to improve communication and parent’s accessibility to school language services. For this reasons, our school survey parents that prefer a language other than English on the language access services and obtains information that is used to enhance our services. We conduct annual survey using Language Line to survey parents about language assistance provided during the school year and use this information to make improvements. 4 
