 School Name: 10X306 P.S. 306 Principal: DARRYL HARRINGTON   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information ARTS VILLAGE 321000010306 K-5 School Number (DBN): 10X306 40 WEST TREMONT AVE Bronx, NY 10453 7185835355 Phone Number: 7185835885 Fax: REINA MELENDEZ RMELEND@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: DARRYL HARRINGTON Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: GWEN DENNISTON Marsha Johnson MARTHA CANALES ALISA SANCHEZ n/a Morris Height Clinic Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information MARIBEL HULLA Superintendent: 1 FORDHAM PLAZA Bronx, NY 10458 mhulla@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741-7098 Fax: NANCY SAFFER Field Support Center (FSC) JOSE RUIZ FSC: Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: 1 FORDHAM PLAZABronx, NY 10458 RRUIZ2@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-741-5852 Phone Number: 718-741 7098 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Morris Heights Health Center CBO Representative, if applicable LAUREN SOLANO MARTHA CANALES ALBAINIA PERDOMO UFT UFT PARENT  Name DARRYL HARRINGTON GWEN DENNISTON MARGARET JOHNSON Alisa Sanchez XIONA MARA FIGUEROA n/a n/a *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools)  Name CHARELA PENA HERRERA XIOMARA FIGUEROA ROSE PACIFICO Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) PARENT Parent UFT Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview  The mission of PS306 is to continue to improve student achievement in all content areas by providing high quality professional learning opportunities for teachers, aligning curriculum and assessment, integrating technology into the curriculum, and promoting positive social skills for all members of the school community. Our goal is to make PS 306 a safe haven for students by providing a caring and friendly instructional environment which will carry out into the community. We believe that every student is capable of becoming a productive member of society through the   combined efforts of the school, home and community. Our school offers a welcoming, positive learning environment where students feel safe, cared for and enjoy their learning. The day begins with students reciting a “Scholar’s Creed” encouraging best behavior and a focus on learning. The students are eager to share their work products and discuss how they feel about their teacher.  2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P.S. 306 is an elementary school with 758 students from Kindergarten through 5th grade. The school population comprises 27% Black, 71% Hispanic, 1% Asian, 1% White students. The student body includes 22% English language learners and 15% special education students. Boys account for 48% of the students enrolled and girls account for 52%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2017- 2019 is 94.6%. The school’s investment in Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS) ensures students are honored and celebrated for academic and personal behaviors that support self-regulation and learning. Assemblies highlight the student of the month and those with 100% attendance. In addition, there is a bulletin display of their names. We also provide an end of the year trip for students that have achieved 100% attendance and zero latenesses. Our goal at PS 306 this year is to have our daily attendance to 95%. Student participation in the Girls Scouts , Cookshop, Boy Scouts of America as well as a variety of additional after school programs ensures students have ongoing access to activities that support their social and emotional growth. As a result, our school’s incidents have been reduced by more than half, referrals to special education have decreased dramatically and the school’s overall feedback from the Learning Environment Survey concerning School Culture is higher in satisfaction among parents and teachers. Our Partnerships : 1. City Harvest- Homelessness/Hunger/Poverty 2. Hats on Day -Body Image/Health/Nutrition/Self-Esteem 3. Pennies for Patients- Cancer research 4. March of Dimes Wonder Walk- Children with birth defects 5. Anti Bullying and Safety/NYPD Anti-Bullying/Diversity/School Safety/Tolerance 6. Saturday Adult ESL Classes- Adult Education (GED, citizenship classes) 7. Leave It better Gardening -School/Community Beautification 8. Buddy Student Mentoring/Tutoring/Youth Education 9. Omega Man- Anti-Bullying/Diversity/School Safety/Tolerance Assemblies 10. Author's Book Reading Literacy 11. Cookshop Classroom- Body Image/Health/Nutrition/Self-Esteem 12. Cookshop Families For Parents- Body Image/Health/Nutrition/Self-Esteem 0  13. Leave It better Gardening Committee- Parents 14. School/Community Beautification (painting, clean-ups) 15. Studio In a School- Arts/Self-Esteem 16. Girl Scouts- Character Development/Leadership 17. Boy Scouts- Character Development/Leadership 18. Fire Dept.& NYPD 19. Morris Heights Mental Health Clinic 20. Zaslow Foundation  Our school embraces a culture of mutual respect which supports student and adult learning and cultivates a range of positive student behaviors that promotes academic achievement. Parents, students and staff describe the school as safe and welcoming. Students state they feel safe and that there are fewer incidents of bullying in the school than in the past years. School leaders’ encourage students to write persuasive letters about what they feel the school may need to do in order to improve. For example, students wanted more after school programs. As a result, school leaders secured numerous collaborations to provide students with additional enrichment opportunities after school. Parents state that they enjoy the open door policy the principal has created and state that teachers are readily accessible to discuss their children’s progress and any concerns that may arise. Our After school programs provide support to struggling students and enrichment learning experiences that accelerate student learning beyond grade level standards to support groups of students. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. During the school day, our AIS staff members provide ongoing support to our bottom 1/3 students through a push in or pull out program design model. Based on our Quality Snapshot we ‘exceeded’ the target for Improvement on the State English test. This work has increased shared responsibility for student outcomes and strengthened teacher’s ability to increase student performance resulting in a decrease in the number of all students, including English language learners and special education students, performing at level 1 on the Common Core Benchmark assessments since the beginning of the year. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The DTSDE Tenet(s) in which we made the most growth during the 2018-19 school year are: Tenet 2 School Leader Practices and Decisions, Tenet 4 Teacher Practices and Decisions, Tenet 5: Student Social and Emotional Developmental Health, and Tenet 6 Family and Community Engagement. Our focus this year will be around Tenet 3 Curriculum Development and Support. Some of our challenges are: 1. Enhance the alignment of the school’s curriculum with the Common Core Learning Standards to include key standards that consistently engage students in rigorous tasks in order to promote higher order thinking. (1.1). 1  2. Strengthen teacher practice so that across classrooms students are engaged in high levels of discussions and appropriately challenging tasks in order to extend their thinking.(1.2) 3. Improve assessment practices across classrooms and grades so that adjustments to instruction are timely and provide students with effective feedback in order to accelerate learning. (2.2) 4. Improving the reading performance for Students With Special Needs 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X306 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 0K,01,02,03,04,05 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 692 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 34 34 33 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 11 33 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 89.0% % Attendance Rate 87.7% % Reduced Lunch 14.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.3% 71.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 8.91 0% 18% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 26.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) 58% Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 109 109 33 92.6% 0.4% 21.4% 25.9% 1.3% 0.3% 6 2% 6.1 23.3% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Within Tenets 3.2, 3.4, and 3.5 we have made tremendous improvement as a school community. Frequent visits to classrooms by school leaders and New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) talent coach provides teachers with effective actionable feedback and next steps that support the ongoing development of teacher practice. Consultants and Coaches continue to support teachers with planning units, lessons and instructional tasks resulting in cohesive teacher planning across all grades. School leaders’ normed focus on all components of Danielson’s Framework ensures teachers receive feedback on various elements of their instructional practices. The principal and Assistant Principals meet with teachers on a scheduled one to one basis to discuss their strengths and areas to improve. An outside consultant provides teachers with model demonstration lessons and supports scheduled inter-visitations. New teachers are paired with school coaches, talent coaches or mentor teachers to support their growth in all areas of Danielson’s Framework.  School leaders’ ongoing visits to classrooms effectively capture teacher strengths and areas of challenge for teacher practice. As a result of one to one goal setting with school leaders, teachers focus on a specific component of Danielson’s framework identified in need of strengthening. For example, a key component of focus for this year is questioning and discussions. Therefore, teachers planned with coaches and lead teachers, and teachers with a particular area of expertise provided professional development to staff members. School leaders’ targeted feedback, aligned teacher supports and clear expectations around planning and instruction has resulted in teacher self- reflective practice, improved teacher planning thus ensuring 50% of all students are performing on level on end of unit math tests. The principal effectively aligns resources to support instructional goals resulting in improved student learning outcomes. Strategic school wide scheduling by the principal ensures teachers have time to meet once to twice a week to analyze student assessments and closely examine student work. Across grades teachers identify student trends and needs. In addition, academic tasks are refined and tailored to meet the needs of students. For example, the timeline for which some special education students needed to complete a task was increased to accommodate the pace at which these students were able to work. In subsequent unit tasks, these same students were able to complete the work within the specified period of time. A literacy coach, network instructional staff and additional consultants provide direct assistance to teachers in refining learning tasks so that student work products reflect high levels of rigor thus ensuring alignment to the school’s instructional goals. As a result, across grades the majority of students performing at level 1 on pre-performance assessment tasks have moved to level 2 and 3. An area that we need to improve upon is enhancing the alignment of the school’s curriculum with the Common Core Learning Standards to include key standards that consistently engage students in rigorous tasks in order to promote higher order thinking. Additionally, improve assessment practices across classrooms and grades so that adjustments to instruction are timely and provide students with effective feedback in order to accelerate learning. 4  Our school has adopted several school wide practices to ensure that all students are doing the reading, writing, discussing and thinking in the classroom including: using quick-writes, think-pair-shares, cold-calling, a common annotation system, and hand signals as a check for understanding. We conduct instructional rounds every month to assess our instruction and implementation of our instructional focus. After our November Learning Walk we used the data we collected to provide the staff with more targeted support on Professional development Mondays. We saw a marked improvement in the quantity and quality of reading, writing and genuine discussion. As a school we have done a great job moving our “lowest third” as evidenced in our School Quality Report. Also we have provided important scaffolds for SWD that have allowed them to progress at a higher rate than any other group in our school. Our focus now needs to be on how we are challenging all of our students to work at high levels, aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards. Only 10% of our students scored a Level 3 or Level 4 on the NYS ELA Tests and 15% on the NYS Math Tests. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, instruction will be informed by summative and formative assessments and refined to be customized, inclusive, motivating and aligned to CCLS, resulting in an average math pproficiency of 2.34 and ELA Proficiency of 2.24 as measured on 2019 NYSED ELA/Math assessments. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). 1. Collaborative teams involved in the inquiry process will focus on instructional coherence through the collection of data on how well students are learning. Modifications to the curriculum to address special needs and ESL students. Special education and ESL teachers will look at student work, formative and summative data, lesson plans. All teachers will be trained in the new READYGEN Literacy program. 2.Collaborative Teacher Teams will examine data that involves student performance and progress. Teams will gather and analyze a range of data including summative and formative assessments (e.g. State assessments, periodic assessments, performance tasks, student work,etc.) in order to determine and monitor the progress of the ReadyGen Program. Teams will establish and sustain a transparent and collaborative system for measuring progress toward interim goals and will make adjustments periodically throughout the year . 3. As specified in our Professional Learning Plan , we intend to provide teachers with on-going to support to refine teaching habits and practices. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All Teachers All Teachers All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principals, Assistant Principal, Math and Literacy Coaches Principals, Assistant Principal, Math and Literacy Coaches September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Instructional Coaches, District Support Specialist 6 All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principals, Assistant Principal, Math and Literacy Coaches Principals, Assistant Principal, Math and Literacy Coaches 1. Data will consistently be gathered through teacher team meetings and assessments. The data will then be interpreted for meaning through analysis and discussion. A plan of action will then be implemented, reflected upon and redefined. Through the use of the Common Core standards, teachers will begin to look at the larger goal, grade-specific goals and earlier grade-level goals to understand what pathways will allow a student to eventually produce grade appropriate work. By doing so, teachers will see what a student can do and adapt their teaching to meet the needs of their students, supporting differentiated and adaptive instruction. Collaborative Planning sessions will include discussion over data, establishing trends and patterns among the grade and school-wide, researching possible strategies, interventions, resources and implementation Parents are invited, every Tuesday, to learn about a current unit of study and to learn how to assist their child at home in that content area. Grade level teachers, parents October 2018-June 2019 Grade Team Leaders, Principal, Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will continue to provide parents with workshops, meetings, and discussion groups around the Common Core standards and how they can better help their child/children at home. Our Parent Coordinator will be the point person for this oversight. Online learning will also be implemented to assist parents. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 1. After school programs- per session Wed, Thur, Fri ( 2:30-5:00pm) 2. Literacy Specialist will provide support to teachers and administration. 3. Fordham Univ. Literacy Consultants will analyze students’ needs and plan curriculum units with teacher teams to identify trends and areas of focus Staff salaries, parent involvement, schedule adjustments for every Wednesday Grade level meetings, Monday and Tuesday professional development time and Tuesday parent engagement time Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 7  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will assess our instructional program during Instructional Rounds in October, December, February and May . We are also monitoring class passing rates for every unit assessments and expect an 80% passing rate in all content areas, and track the decisions made from the teacher team meetings. We will facilitate the three Benchmark assessments in ELA and Math and hold Teacher team meetings to make programmatic and instructional changes based upon the data. Our mid-point benchmark data will be 2.44 average proficiency in math and 2.54 average proficiency in ELA, so that we can meet our end of the year average proficiency goals. Our Mid-Year Benchmark assessments will be analyze to monitor performance. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Teacher teams will continue to use a measurement tool to review, analyze, and make revisions to assessments in Literacy, Math, Science, and Social Studies . Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Parents, students and staff describe the school as safe and welcoming based on our last Learning Environment survey (95% of our parents are satisfied with the education that their child is receiving and 91% of our parents feel that we offer a wide variety of courses, extracurricular activities and services). Students state that they feel safe and that there are fewer incidents of bullying in the school than in the past. School leaders’ encourage students to write persuasive letters about what they feel the school may need to do in order to improve. We have a Student Council that is made up of 5 th Grade Student Leaders who serve as Ambassadors for their peers. For example, students wanted more after school programs. As a result, school staff secured numerous collaborations to provide students with additional enrichment opportunities after school. Parents state that they enjoy the open door policy the principal has created and state that teachers are readily accessible to discuss their children’s progress and any concerns that may arise. In addition, parents feel supported with the implementation and extensive information that they received about the Common Core Learning Standards and what is now required of the school and students. Grade Level Leaders make recommendations to school leaders during their monthly meeting with the Principal. As a result, all members of the school community benefit from an inclusive environment that honors student and adult voice and ensures a communal sense of shared responsibility that supports student and adult learning. The school’s investment in Positive Behavior Intervention Systems (PBIS) ensures students are honored and celebrated for academic and personal behaviors that support self-regulation and learning. Assemblies highlight the student of the month and those with 100% attendance. During the 2018-19 school year , we are implementing the CKCC (Competent Caring Kids Community) social emotional learning curriculum school wide. This curriculum includes specific goals and lesson plans that will be taught to all students regarding common character traits we want to teach as well as our norms of operation in the school. The language of CKCC will be aligned to our PBIS system. Additionally, it is necessary to consistently teach and model these values, but to also reinforce these values using PBIS methods. Teachers need further professional development on social emotional learning, character education, and preventive strategies to address student behaviors in their classrooms. We have student intervention protocols in place on a weekly basis and it is our goal to be clear and consistent in our communication in how all stakeholders can intervene. We will use dedicated PD time to teach teachers strategies, tools, context, and implementation of character education in support of social emotional developmental and academic success. Teacher teams will hold each other accountable to these initiatives through formalized inter-visitations and team protocols to monitor their own progress. In our efforts to establish overarching systems that promote a vision for social and emotional developmental health that is aligned to a curriculum, as well as to develop a common understanding of the importance of ALL STAKEHOLDERS contributions in creating a school community that is safe, we must utilize data in a systematic way. We will work together to establish structures to support the use of data to respond to student social and emotional developmental health needs. We will do this by developing a communication tool for staff to align interventions; we will use data to monitor student progress in healthy school participation. Part 2 – Annual Goal 9  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. ▪ During the 2018-2019 School Year, PS 306 will develop and teach a common social and emotional curriculum which will be monitored through data and reinforced in a school-wide PBIS system, which will result in less than 10 Principal suspensions over the course of the school year. 0 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers, Guidance Counselors, SBST September 2018 June 2019 PBIS Committee, Grade Level Leaders, Assistant Principals, Principal Classroom teachers, Guidance Counselors, SBST September 2018- June 2019 PBIS Committee, Grade Level Leaders, Assistant Principals, Principal, parents Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Through consultants from the CKCC organization, teachers will receive professional development in the area of positive student engagement. CKCC Training is structured, practical, and valuable for seasoned practitioners as well as those new to the field. The professional development sessions introduce educators to the CKCC approach and provide tools and techniques for building teacher capacity in the areas of classroom and behavior management. Individualized Coaching sessions will be offered to teachers based on a needs assessment. Coaching is an integral part of the CKCC Training program that helps teachers with their particular classroom and behavior management challenges. Ongoing coaching provides individuals and small groups of school staff with specific problem-solving techniques, objective feedback, and an opportunity to reflect on their current practice. Realizing the impact of peer pressure on students, it is important that teachers are trained in the most effective methods of building cohesive and collaborative classrooms. Additionally, we will continue to implement (year 3) our PBIS program and support our students with a positive and preventive approach to social/emotional issues. Across disciplines teachers will collaborate in the development of monthly assembly programs that show case grade level accomplishments and provide students a forum to demonstrate their talents. Classroom, grade level and school wide attendance rewards will be distributed on a monthly basis. Classroom teachers will be informed on a daily basis of their class attendance percentage. Attendance graphs will be placed outside each classroom, informing students of their class attendance percentage. Students will participate in healthy exercise assemblies, which will focus on taking responsibility, planning and being a good student. Our parent coordinator and school base support team will facilitate workshops with parents to understand their challenges and to offer support to improve their child’s attendance. Our guidance counselor and school base support team members will be assigned students that have demonstrated the need for emotional support. School administrators and teachers will meet daily to proactively 1  discuss behavioral concerns. The parent coordinator will conduct parent workshops on topics such as: building strong families, constructive habits, productive television programs, after school supervision, childcare and pro social skills. In collaboration with our parents, community outreach initiatives will take place on a monthly basis. Focusing on the need for parent support services, counseling, health care and academic tutoring, and various communities based organizations will be contacted and invited to meet with school personnel. By June 2019 all students in grades K-5, through our arts program will participate in ten assemblies that are designed to build community among students, grow student self-esteem, and showcase the individual talents/abilities of students.  By June of 2019, our average monthly attendance will increase by 4%.  By June 2019 our school wide suspensions will decrease by 40%. n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Staff/students mid year Guidance Counselor n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be provided the opportunity to learn more about our PBIS program and how they can support us at home with our expectations for social emotional learning. The Guidance Counselors will be responsible for ensuring that all parents are included in our framework for a Supportive Environment. Ongoing monitoring and feedback sessions will be put in place. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funding will be scheduled to pay costs for personnel, professional development , and student incentives. The largest funding source will be School Wide Project funds.teacher per session-$25,000 Supervisor per session $7, 000 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 2  By January of 2019, there will be less than 10 Principal suspensions. We have gone from 40 in 2012 to 4 in 2017-18 Our suspension rates will be monitored by our Behavioral Intervention team monthly. Our Mid year CKCC benchmark will monitor progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Our CKCC program contains a measurement tool such as interim assessments, and surveys to monitor progress. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Teacher teams use School Quality review report to evaluate curriculum and make instructional decisions around ELL and SWDs.. Teachers and students use rubrics to assess their work. Grade level rubrics are task specific and results guide instructional adjustments and student grouping for additional support. Teachers meet weekly to review student data pulled from Formative and Summative assessments and the literacy programs’ diagnostic assessments. Many structures are in place which allow for teachers to share a common language and collaborate. We have a website where Teachers share best practices, documents, etc through the use of Google docs. There is a specific unit and lesson plan template that allows for teachers to share a common language around planning. There are several school-wide instructional practices which are consistent across grades and classrooms (use of quick-writes, accountable talk, cold-calling, annotation symbols, hand signals and think-pair-share protocols). Teacher Grade teams have developed common rubrics for use with specific performance tasks that are rigorous and Common Core aligned. Changes by teachers in instructional strategies to support students in reading and writing are being implemented. For example, across classrooms this year there is a greater focus on the use of reading material that interests young males. As a result, classrooms are endowed with a variety of reading material that attract and encourage male students to read. In addition, our teachers are working towards building reading stamina amongst our students, especially males. This year we incorporated the DEAR (Drop Everything And Read) initiative with the goal of increasing independent reading time amongst our students. Additionally, teachers and students are very excited to be able to use MYon to support their literacy goals and interested. Myon is the world’s largest interactive digital library with over 4,000 books geared for pre-K through 12th grade. Our students are provided with a wealth of reading resources to support their academic growth through the use of the Myon program. Across classrooms teachers and school leaders have focused intently on ensuring Danielson’s Framework components, specifically Questioning & Discussions, which is embedded into Teachers’ practice. As a result, teachers are spending more time engaging students in rich discussions about text. Additionally, teachers are providing students with the opportunity to engage in deep conversations that promote critical thinking which will result in high level student work products. This is our school wide focus. This has created an over-all common language regarding planning, environment, instruction and professional responsibilities Areas that we need improvement: Student small instructional groupings that are designed to provide multiple entry points to targeted sub groups including opportunities to expand the learning experiences of higher performing students are not yet fully developed thus limiting student prospects to extend thinking and improve learning outcomes. Across classrooms teaching practices that fully address the needs of ESL students and special education students are not yet consistent, thus 4  hindering them from participating in rigorous tasks that promotes high levels of thinking. Now that we are incorporating Instructional Shifts from Instructional Learning walks and teacher grade teams are focusing on ensuring that all students are engaged in appropriately challenging tasks during their lessons which allows for high levels of student engagement and inquiry. However, refining rubrics for students to self- assess and gain detailed actionable feedback to move work toward mastery and beyond is not yet fully developed limiting students from taking ownership of expanding their own learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-19 school year, ongoing professional development will be provided for literacy strategies within the content areas so as to improve instructional practices and promote high levels of engagement that will result in 5% increase of student performance. Additionally, teacher collaboration will increase by 25% as evidenced by set schedule and protocols that we will put in place. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Collaborative teams involved in the inquiry process will focus on instructional coherence through the collection of data on how well students are learning the desired outcomes. Special education and ESL teachers will look at student work, formative and summative data, lesson plans. Collaborative Teams will examine data that involves the school environment, student performance and progress. Teams will gather and analyze a range of data including summative (e.g. State assessments, attendance, safety and discipline, student support services, referrals) and formative assessments (student work products and classroom observations) in order to create a clear portrait of the school’s grade, or sub groups’ strengths and areas of need. Teams will establish and sustain a transparent and collaborative system for measuring progress toward interim goals and will make adjustments periodically throughout the year. Data will consistently be gathered through walkthroughs and assessments. The data will then be interpreted for meaning through analysis and discussion. A plan of action will then be implemented, reflected upon and redefined. Through the use of the Common Core standards, teachers will begin to look at the larger goal, grade-specific goals and earlier grade-level goals to understand what pathways will allow a student to eventually produce grade appropriate work. By doing so, teachers will see what a student can do and adapt their teaching to meet the needs of their students, supporting differentiated and adaptive instruction. Teachers will ensure that unit and lesson plans are appropriately aligned to the CCLS curriculum and introduce complex materials that stimulate higher-order thinking and develop knowledge around specific content. Teacher teams will develop lessons that are rigorous with higher order questions in instruction as well as inquiry based learning opportunities. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal 6 Support teachers to develop and nurture their instructional expertise during regularly scheduled meetings with targeted agendas based on student and grade data to ensure that all unit plans across their grade subjects are appropriately aligned to the CCLS curriculum and students’ needs. Provide weekly professional development and team meetings, to conduct data cycles and plan differentiated supports for students. Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator Scheduling provides the structure that encourages teacher collaboration through a common flow of the day that supports professional development (inter-visitation, lunch-n-learn sessions). All teachers will be given time to work with the collaborative teams weekly. There will be teams that are school wide and others that are grade specific. Teams will analyze relevant data, test out instructional approaches, create and refine common student tasks. Through effective accountable collaboration, teacher teams will develop goals; support the culture of data; discuss common issues, questions, and concerns; as well as support the quality of instruction, and the integration of technology and inquiry to engage students Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Teacher support will begin with Welcome Back To School Night. Every Teacher will be paired with groups of parents to focus on learning expectations, curriculum resources, and our school goals will be explicitly shared with all parents. By January 2018, we will have held 10 Parent -teacher meetings to support learning at home with specific strategies and resources. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Staff and parents, Weekly planning time, Coaches, and instructional materials. Additionally per session will be provided to support teacher development and planning teams. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our monthly Learning Walks, Teacher Observations, and student outcomes will be reviewed and discussed monthly to monitor Instructional shifts. By January 2019 we will see 5% increase in Common Core Benchmark 5assessments. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7  Learning Walks will take place on a Monthly basis to ensure school wide goals around observations are being met. District walk-throughs will also take place. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. During the 2018-19 school year , all teachers will have at least 10 instructional feedback interactions with a supervisor, including 4 written formal/Informal observations for both tenure and non-tenured teachers. The basis of the feedback will be around the work of the Danielson Framework For Teaching, Our focus for this school year will be: Competency 1a- Demonstrating Knowledge of Content & Pedagogy Competency 1e- Designing Coherent Instruction Competency 2a- Creating an Environment of Respect & Rapport Competency 2d- Managing Student Behavior Competency 3b- Using Questioning & Discussion Techniques Competency 3c- Engaging Students in Learning Competency 3d- Using Assessment in Instruction Competency 4e- Growing& Developing Professionally The work of teacher teams is complemented by grade level lead teachers who take on significant leadership roles and work as facilitators at weekly teacher meetings. Frequent visits to classrooms by school leaders and New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) talent coach provides teachers with effective actionable feedback and next steps that support the ongoing development of teacher practice. Coaches supported teachers with planning units, lessons and instructional tasks resulting in cohesive teacher planning across all grades. School leaders’ normed focus on all components of Danielson’s Framework ensures teachers receive feedback on various elements of their instructional practices. The principal and assistant principals meet with teachers on a scheduled one to one basis to discuss their strengths and areas to improve. An outside consultant provides teachers with model demonstration lessons and supports scheduled inter-visitations. New teachers are paired with school coaches, talent coaches or mentor teachers to support their growth in all areas of Danielson’s Framework. Strategies and suggestions on We Teach NYC provides additional resources for teachers to access so that they may continue to improve their instructional practice. Cursory visits by school leaders and coaches ensure teachers are reflective about their practice and accountable for recommendations made. As a result, there has been a 20% increase of teachers moving from the developing level to the effective level in across all of Danielson’s domains since the beginning of the school year. School leaders’ ongoing visits to classrooms effectively capture teacher strengths and areas of challenge for teacher practice. As a result of one to one goal setting with school 9  leaders, teachers focus on a specific component of Danielson’s framework identified in need of strengthening. Therefore, teachers planned with coaches and lead teachers, and teachers with a particular area of expertise provide professional development to staff. For example, a teacher particularly knowledgeable in the area of supporting English language learners provides teaching strategies to a teacher in need of support in this area. As a result, more ESL students scored proficient on the 2018 NYSELAT. In addition, frequent teacher use of exemplars of instructional practices from ARIS Learn supports teacher practice. School leaders’ targeted feedback, aligned teacher supports and clear expectations around planning and instruction has resulted in teacher self- reflective practice, improved teacher planning thus ensuring that all students are receiving quality instruction. Areas of Improvement: We need to continue to monitor and modify our systems for school improvement, especially as it relates to our Reading curriculum. Although the school has committed to the use of the NYCDOE recommended Literacy program ReadyGen and teachers plan together to design effective Units, we still need to continue to address our SWDs and ESL students. We must continue to boost the level of rigor of the program and develops teacher’s expertise with the ReadyGen materials/resources. Our instructional shifts and full alignment to Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) is still developing, therefore impacting the consistency of instructional rigor needed to ensure students are on a path to higher learning and college or career. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. During the 2018-2019 School Year, supervisors will clearly articulate the school goals and engage in regular mini-observations and evaluative observations, and mentors will be assigned to all new teachers, which will result in eighty-five percent of all teachers rated Effective in Domain 3. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? ~The administrative staff will use the Danielson Framework for Teacher Development as a resource to develop their professional goals for the school year. Classroom Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 ~Build teacher’s knowledge of the Framework through the Professional Development Mondays. ~Use the Danielson Framework for Mid-year Conversations in December and January; anyone who is consistently below Effective will then be put on a Teacher Improvement Plan. ~Use the Danielson Framework for End-of The year Conversations in June 2019 ~Mentor teachers will use the Framework in their work with mentees to support their development ~The Principal and each Assistant Principals will have observed classroom teachers a total eight times by May 2019 ~All teachers will develop and use CCLS appropriately aligned lessons plans that promote higher-order thinking skills in all groups of students and develop analytical, evaluative and reflective skills across content areas by providing supports and extensions necessary for student achievement. Classroom Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 ~Continue to offer AIS programs for SWDs and ESL students, including After school programs, Do the Reading/Math homework help morning group, homework help for SWD and ESL students each morning,. Classroom Teachers, Students September 2018- June 2019 Use mid- year data action plans” for teachers to plan specific strategies to help struggling students Parent Workshops around these focus areas: 1. Student Achievement 2. Social Emotional Development Parents, Parent Coordinator September 2018- June 2019 Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal Classroom teachers, Coaches, Special Education & ESL , Coordinator, Assistant Principal, and Principal 1 3. Homework help 4. Community Services Parent Outreach services 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our Leadership team will promote our mission statement-Parents are essential partners in their children’s education and an integral part of improving our schools and strengthening communities. We are committed to providing our families with the support and information needed to best help their children. We know that when parents are involved, our students succeed.. This message will be reflected in the 15 Parent Workshops that will be lead by each Assistant Principal for the 2018-19 school year. By January 2019, each Assistant Principal will have lead a Parent Workshop around parent leadership and engagement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Administrators, Coaches, Teachers, parents, students, Learning Walks, Breakfast With Principal, Student award ceremonies, Saturday and After School Classes, AIS providers, Math Enrichment program, Parent programs Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Advance data indicate in January that 75% of teachers are scoring ‘effective’ in observations. Teachers who are not at “effective” have action plans in place to meet the goal by the end of the school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. We will measure this goal conducting interim reports to monitor teacher feedback. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Parents appreciate the school’s efforts to involve them in their children’s learning through monthly calendars, newsletters and monthly progress report. Consequently, they appreciate the high expectations that are consistently communicated and how well their children are progressing. Several parents are fully involved in the daily life of the school and its leadership team. They particularly enjoy the workshops and speakers that provide training. Consequently, they find the school welcoming and supportive, giving parents a real sense of being partners of the process to support their children’s achievement. As a school community, we recognize the importance of developing the whole child and preparing them for their role as future citizens. We continue to strive to create a warm and nurturing environment for all of our students. Our guidance counselors, social workers and school psychologists provide lessons to support the emotional and social development of the students and organize special assemblies. Additionally, our book-of-the-month selections provide school wide conversations around topics of acceptance, friendships and anti-bullying. Our campus is a very welcoming environment. When you walk in the front door, you will see the flags of the many countries that our families and staff are from celebrating Cultural diversity. The building is well maintained and teachers and students create beautiful displays to support a positive learning climate. At PS 306 we have many family-oriented events. In addition to holding the four mandatory school-wide meetings with families, we have a monthly ‘Sip & Chat’ with parents and Student Of The Month assemblies celebrating academic achievement. Staff are utilizing the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to create relationships with the families of their homeroom students. They are called each week and invited to participate in our weekly curriculum shares. At the curriculum share, a teacher informs the parents and other teachers on the grade about their current unit of study and how everyone can assist the student to learn the material. The Principal holds regular, “sessions. At these meetings parents are informed about specific topics and have a chance to ask questions and comment on anything at the school. They also visit classrooms during these sessions. The parents/guardians provide ideas for future sessions. We work in collaboration with Morris Heights Medical and Mental Health Clinic (housed in our building) to provide resources for families. Every Saturday, we hold ESL classes for parents from our school. Our students assist the parents with the computer-based portion of the class. Parents and families of students at P.S. 306 are provided with opportunities to participate in the Parents’ Association, the School Leadership Team, parent education activities that relate to building strong home/school partnerships, family literacy, family math, workshops which promote an understanding of performance standards and the new promotional criteria, the parent volunteer program, and accessing the services of community resources. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 3  During the 2018-19 school year, there will be increased opportunities for parent engagement with in the school so that parents and families feel welcomed and encouraged to engage with the school and student learning which results in 15% increase in attendance in parent teacher conference, workshops, and special events . 4 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? September 2018 - June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals Parents, Teachers, Support Staff, PTA President Parents, Teachers, Support Staff, PTA President Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). ~Parents and families of students in the P.S. 306 will be provided with opportunities to participate in school-based planning committees, and in the School Leadership Team. Parent education activities that relate to building strong home/school partnerships, family literacy, child development and accessing the services of community resources will also be available. ~Offer-parent training workshops/meetings related to: 1. Eligibility criteria for entrance into various programs (e.g. bilingual programs); 2. Educational structure and terminology; 3. Rules and regulations regarding budget expenditures 4. Parenting skills; 5. Math, literacy, Home School Partnership , Health Education 6. Introduction to Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and the use of the internet 7. Summer camp listings and assistance 8. Resume and cover letter development 9. Medical/health related resources in the community Adult and Continuing Education program (ESL and Basic Education ~Provide a Parent Room in which parents will feel welcome and can coordinate activities for parent involvement. ~Provide resources for family outreach to assist and inform parents, and involve them in the school community. Parents, Teachers, Support Staff, PTA President September 2018- June 2019 Parent Coordinator, Principal, Assistant Principals 5  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Our CBO for the 2018-19 school year will be the Morris Height Health Clinic and the Ackerman's Family Institute For Families. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator, Supplies, Materials, Incentives, etc. Parent involvement Title I funds will be used to pay for parent trainings, workshops, and incentives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January 2019 we will assess our goals and action plan. Additionally, parent meetings/conference sign in sheets will be collected and monitor and increase parental involvement. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. School Administration will meet biweekly to assess the impact of Parent engagement and monitor our progress using our online monitoring systems Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) A student performs below grade level on the Baseline assessments, NYS exams, etc. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) INTERVENTION BY DESIGN RTI Mathematics ENVISIONS A student performs below grade level on the Baseline assessments, NYS exams, etc. When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Before school, during the day, after school and Saturdays Before school, during the day, after school and Saturdays Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Differentiated instruction will take place in every classroom through Tier I interventions and small group instruction. Through frequent content assessments, AIS meetings, and data analysis of student performance students will be placed in Tier II & III intervention. Students who are not benefiting from Tier I interventions will be referred to participate in the Intervention By Design program with close monitoring. Additionally those students will participate in the Young Scholars After School program For Math AIS we will be using he Math Diagnosis and Intervention System that accompanies Pearson’s enVisionMath Program. This 4 step system is built 7  Science Harcourt Science Program A student performs below grade level on the Baseline assessments, NYS exams, etc. Social Studies Harcourt Social Studies Program A student performs below grade level on the Baseline assessments, NYS exams, etc. At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, A student performs below grade level on the Baseline assessments, NYS PBIS At Risk Counseling around Assessment, Diagnosis, Intervention, and Monitoring. There is an entry level assessment that is used to diagnose the areas of need students have. Students are then grouped according to similar needs. The materials provided in the program run parallel to the enVisionMath In addition to the state mandated periods of science instruction, we have two Science cluster teachers who service students in grades K to 5. The classroom teachers also integrate Science into the literacy block via the use of Science related books and materials. In addition to the state mandated periods of Social Studies instruction, we have two Social Studies cluster teachers who service students in grades K to 5. The classroom teachers also integrate Social Studies into the literacy block via the use of Science related books and materials. Individual counseling for students in crisis to address emotional issues. This service is During the day, after school and Saturdays During the day, after school and Saturdays Before school, during the day, after school and Saturdays 8 School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) exams, etc. and requires social emotional support Mandated Counseling scheduled during the school day. Small group or individual counseling to address the social and emotional needs of at risk students. This service is scheduled during the school day. Crisis intervention, individual, small group and family counseling to address behavioral, emotional and social issues. This service is scheduled during the school day and after school, including evenings 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 17 as of the 2018-19 school year 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will continue to provide counseling, mentoring, after school programs, materials and resources to support their academic and social emotional development. Also we will provide busing as needed Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  n/a 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. n/a 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have partnerships with Fordham University, Oswego, Lehman College and NYU. We assign student teachers to our most highly effective teachers, who serve as mentors. We provide mentoring and all of the professional development that is provided for all of our teachers during a mentees time in our school. All staff members will receive professional development that is targeted and specific to their license area. New Teachers will be paired with a Mentor and will be supported by the New Teachers organization. I will continue to build capacity from among my staff and train teachers for leadership positions. Our administrative team will further support teacher leaders by selecting at least one teacher per grade to participate in the 2016-17 Teacher Leadership Program (TLP) . The Teacher leadership program is designed to build the capacity of teacher leaders in order to promote distributive leadership and improve student outcomes. Additionally, TLP is working with teacher leaders to ensure that the work of teacher teams is aligned to Quality Review indicator 4.2. TLP is training teacher leaders to facilitate and support their colleagues in teams to engage in learning with texts, look at teacher and student work in order to assess its alignment to the Common Core Learning Standards, visit colleagues’ classrooms to give actionable feedback using the targeted competencies in Danielson’s Framework for Teaching , and create professional learning communities focused on increasing student achievement. Teacher leaders will facilitate learning opportunities with their colleagues in three ways: ● Logistics: Teacher leaders will be implementing the logistical strategies they are learning in the program to develop a long term plan to work with their teams as well as understand how to plan agendas for and facilitate weekly team meetings. ● Learning: With their teams, teacher leaders will develop a vision for the work they will do together and tracking the progress of the team. ● Longevity: Teacher leaders will help their colleagues identify how the inquiry work of the team is related to school goals and broader DOE initiatives such as the citywide instructional expectations and special education reform (A Shared Path to Success). There are also orientation sessions and monthly check-in’s, by administrators. Student teachers are observed and viewed as possible applicants. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development 2  Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development will be an essential component to support teachers understanding and extend best practices in all areas of instruction to bring students to grade level performance. Teachers will receive training and support from various school leaders including the Assistant Principals, Instructional Support Specialists, Grade Level Leaders, peer teachers, Network Specialist and the Department of Education on effective instructional strategies, interventions and differentiation. As written in our School Wide Professional Development Plan, each teacher will be provided with internal or external learning experiences based on their needs. The Instructional Team will monitor compliance standards and revise the systems as needed. A major initiative for the 2018-2019 school year will be our work to support and improve instruction in Reading, Writing and Math. Staff developers will work with our Administrators and Teaching staff to ensure that our instructional model supports effective strategies which includes measureable timelines, established goals, and identified resources to supports students. Teachers will be involved in a sequence of professional development throughout the year that provides multilayered support to teachers; involving demonstration of teaching, in-class coaching, assessment support, and study-groups on lifting the level of instruction on particular units of study or on supporting students with particular needs. Professional development opportunities will encourage teachers to continuously evaluate and revise their classroom practices to improve student outcomes. The Charlotte Danielson Framework will be used as the foundation for professional conversations among practitioners of the school’s mentoring, coaching, professional development, and teacher evaluation processes. The Charlotte Danielson Framework will be used as an observational tool to enable administrators to provide consistent feedback to staff on order to improve the quality of instruction. Teachers will be supported in the use of a variety of instructional strategies, including the use of technology to encourage students’ development of critical thinking, problem solving and performance skills. Teachers will be provided with differentiated support on specific developmental, pedagogical, and content knowledge needs (including mentoring, teacher learning, coaching, and targeted professional development opportunities) with special attention to new teachers and teachers who are new to an in/out of classroom position in the school. All teachers working with our ELL and SWD populations will receive professional development specific to meeting the needs of our targeted students, including the use of NYSESLAT data to differentiate strategies to meet the needs of students and in the use of effective ESL strategies Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). 3  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). The PreSchool programs in the area will be provided with a Spring Orientation for upcoming students and families. At this orientation, they will get the opportunity to learn about the Kindergarten curriculum and expectations. The Parent Coordinator along with the Assistant Principal in Kindergarten/1 st grade will collaborate an ongoing partnership through the year to ensure a seamless transition for students from Preschool to Kindergarten 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. In the Spring of 2018 a Measures of Student Learning (MOSL) committee was formed, with members from all departments and grade levels. The MOSL committee recommended the assessments that would be used at the school for SY 2018-2019 Each member decided which assessment would best meet the needs of our students Following the administration of the MOSL assessments, teachers will meet to score the assessments and to plan future instruction based upon the student results. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal 706,111.00 167,910.00 15,376.00 0 x X X X 4  Tax Levy (FSF) Local 4,074,276.00 X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. 5  Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. P.S. 306, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. P.s 306 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) P.S. 306, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 9  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 0  ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 1  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 2  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 3  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: During these school years 2018-2020, we will use the federal title III grant to supplement our services to Ell students in the bilingual and ENL after-school program. In addition, other grants will be used to fund this program. Our 2016-2017 NYSESLAT scores, revealed that our Ell's need additional support in oral language and in writing . Therefore, we will use the Title III grant to enhance our ELL program. The goal of this program is to help our newcomers gain proficiency in oral language development, develop vocabulary and to support students who are at the transitioning and expanding levels to understand and apply comprehension reading and writing strategies in English. We will be offering four extended day classes to meet the diverse needs of our ELL population. We will service students in grades 2 through 5. In order to address the needs of our English language learners the students will be grouped be grade level and by English language acquisition level. The subgroups will be as follow: Newcomers, transitioning, expanding, commanding, and students with disabilities. For instruction, the students will be grouped according to their proficiency levels in the new language and in the home language where applicable. The classes will consist of approximately 10-12 students per teacher for a total of 50 students to be service by the extended day program. Each each group will meet two days a week for two hours and 30 minutes. The program will begin on October 17, 2018 and it will run until April 30th, 2017 for a total of 27 weeks or a total of 47 instructional days. The program will meet on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:30 to 5:00 P.M. All instructors are New York State Certified as teachers of English to speakers of other languages and/or bilingual common branches that have at least three satisfactory years of of teaching experience with English language learners. Our four teachers will be assigned to a specific group of students that they will instruct for the whole session. Each day students will participate in English language development from 2:30 to 3:30 for a total of 60 minutes a day, from 3:30 to 4:15 they will engage in Imagine Learning, our technology component, for a total of 45 minutes a day, and from 4:15 to 5:00 they will be instructed in math for a total of 45 minutes a day. This scheduled will be followed for all four groups. During English Language development Ells will be instructed solely in English with home Language support when necessary. Teachers will engage students in a scaffold approach in which they build confidence by beginning with simple fiction and moving on to more difficult informational text in the content areas from the Language, Literacy, and Vocabulary Guided Reading Program from Peoples Education, keep on Reading Comprehension Across the Curriculum. Each lesson will be presented in a three-part lesson format: before reading, during and after reading activities. These activities will entailed explicit instruction, guided questions to scaffold instruction, vocabulary, and short-answer questions. This program is composed of eight units for a total of 40 lessons. Each lesson will be developed in a one to two day session. The program will provide the students with many opportunities to build on academic vocabulary, and background knowledge in science, social studies, and mathematics. These materials are 4  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information supplemental and distinct from those used for daily instruction. This program will offer our students rich opportunities to build background knowledge, develop vocabulary, oral language and learn grade level content in order to become confident and strategic readers. Our students will be also part of our technology component for 45 minutes daily. The students will use Imagine Learning, and interactive language and literacy technology-based program that accelerates English acquisition. This program will allow students to increase their listening and speaking skills. The program is designed to enable students to gain proficiency in oral language development and academic vocabulary. In addition, at the end of each session the students will receive math instruction for 45 minutes. All subgroups regardless the grade will receive math support in the new language with the exception of the newcomers in grades 3-5 . Our entering students will receive math support in Spanish. All the materials use to instruct math are supplemental and distinct from those use during daily instruction. Our students will use Supporting the Standards Foundational Mathematics by Triumphlearning and Spanish STAAR Math by Teacher's Treasures Publishing. These programs will help the students master key concepts to succeed in math and allow them to meet NYS Common Core Learning Standards for math. These programs are composed of 20 lessons. Every lesson will be taught in a two day period. Each lesson addresses one math Common Core learning standard that will be broken down in two days. Each lesson includes modeling, guided practice of key concept, academic vocabulary, and ample opportunities to master it. We use data to guide and improve the quality of our core instruction and to make sure that our students have quality opportunities to receive targeted instruction that matches their needs. Our school uses data to guide instruction for Ells in many ways. First, teachers analyze the data to identify struggling students in their classes, if the majority of them are showing little progress then teachers focus on improving core instruction. After, we examined achievement at the classroom level, the next step is to gather specific information about the students' classrooms experiences, and their home and community context in order to support their needs. We analyze data through language. Our school analyze informal and formal assessment data in order to determine ELL progress in different content areas as it pertains to English proficiency. The student's language development is considered in all our instructional decisions. We use the Targets of Measurement and the Bilingual Progressions in planning for new language instruction. The stages of language acquisition are use to differentiate teaching in learning in the Ells classrooms. In addition, these stages help us identify the strategies and skills that our ELL students need to master in order to achieve academic and conversational language. The Targets of Measurement enable us to support and scaffold learning to make content and language comprehensible to all students regardless their language proficiency. Our student's educational history and cultural background are considered when planning the ENL curriculum. Our school analyze informal and formal assessment data in order to determine ELL progress in different content areas as it pertains to English proficiency. The student's language development is considered in all our instructional decisions. We use the Targets of Measurement and the Bilingual Progressions in planning for new language instruction. The stages of language acquisition are use to differentiate teaching in learning in the Ells classrooms. In addition, these stages help us identify the strategies and skills that our ELL students need to master in order to achieve academic and conversational language. The Targets of Measurement enable us to support and scaffold learning to make content and language comprehensible to all students regardless their language proficiency. Our student's educational history and cultural background are considered when planning the ENL curriculum. All notifications and information regarding this program will be kept in a binder in the school's main office and all correspondence to parents and guardians will be sent in the parents preferred languages. 5  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: All teachers participating in the Title III program will receive ongoing PD related to the program. Our four bilingual/ENL teachers will be provided professional development by our Bilingual /ENL Coordinator, Martha Canales, who is dually certified as bilingual and ENL teacher and our Literacy support person, Yolanda Bravo, who is certified in literacy. Through these workshops our teachers will identify, model, and discuss instructional strategies and techniques that benefit English Language Learners in order to create and adapt lessons according to their students needs. Our scheduled coaching sessions for teachers in the ELL programs (with articulation afterwards) are consistent with the training and/or focus discussed at these meetings. Teachers of Ells will also attend ENL /bilingual workshops offered by the Bilingual Team at our school. Our series of professional development for 2016-2017 is scheduled as follow: October 23, Hallmarks for Advanced Literacy, November 13th, Helping Ell's Access Complex Text Across Content Areas. December 11,Leading Advanced Literacy Instruction to Promote Ell's Achievement. January 15, 2019, Common Instructional Practices to better Support Ell's in All Classrooms, February 12, Analyzing Student Work Using the NYSESLAT Rubric, March 19th, Language for Math/Building Academic language, and our last meeting will be on April 9th, Aligning Language and vocabulary development to Writing Demands. Every PD session will run for an hour and 30 minutes. These Professional Development meetings will be at no cost to the program and the providers t will receive ongoing PD from the Office of English language Learners and the ELL Services Coordinator, Maria Guerrero from the Bronx Field Support Center. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parent survey results are used to determine workshop topics. Parents are notified of these activities through the use of school messenger system, school calendar, posters display throughout the school, invitations that are sent and home in the parent's preferred languages and during our Parent Teacher Association meetings. The activities parents are offered are activities they can use with their families at home. For example, parents are always asking for ways they can assist their children with math or reading for the State Exams. As a result, a series 6 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities of workshops are scheduled for the parents to teach them games and strategies they can play and practice at home with their children so that they may reinforce the skills the children have learned at school. The topics will include helping with homework, state testing, school volunteerism, Common Core Standards, Selecting the Best School for your Child, Child Safety, Health Issues for Children, and Cooking and Eating Healthy. These Workshops are provided by our Parent Coordinator, Debra Sloan, and members of the community at no cost to the program. These workshops are scheduled on the second Tuesday of every month from 2:45 to 3:40 P.M. Most of our parent meeting are provided in both English and Spanish. If is necessary the unit of translation and interpretation is contacted. In addition, we will offer our parents two ENL/ESL classes: a class for beginners and an advanced class. Our ENL classes will meet every Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. starting October 17, 2018 until June 15, 2019 for a total of 30 sessions. These classes will be instructed by two certified ENL/ESL teachers. This parent development piece will be at no cost to the program. All correspondence, agendas, notifications, and attendance records will be kept in a binder located in the supervisor's office. All correspondence to parents will be provided in the parent's preferred languages. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) n/a  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff n/a and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 7  8  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name PS 306 Borough Bronx School Number 306 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Daryl Harrington Coach Miriam Katz ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Martha Canales Teacher/Subject Area Yvelisse Perez, grade 1 Teacher/Subject Area Brenda Diaz, grade 2 Related-Service Provider Altagracia Jorge, Speech Superintendent Assistant Principal John Hickman Coach Rose Pacifico/Yolanda Bravo School Counselor Betsaida Bonano Parent Margaret Johnson Parent Coordinator Debra Sloan Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Stephanie Torres, ENL Teacher C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 2 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 3 0 5 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 9  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 768 Total number of ELLs 112 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.58% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 0 0 0 0 PrograLangm TBE TBE TBE DL . 0 0 0 0 K 01 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 7 8 9 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 n/a n/a 0 n/a n/a 0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 10 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 11 n/a0 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 12 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Several assessment tools are used to assess the early literacy skills of our Ell's. We use baselines and endlines for reading, writing and math based on our reading program-Ready Gen and our math program-Envision. We also use DRA in English, and EDL in Spanish to gather data to drive our instruction. In addition, teachers’ observations gathered from small group instruction, guided reading, and individual conferences also inform our instructional decisions. Our school uses EDL (Evaluacion del desarrollo de la lectura)and Fundations Phonics Program to assess the Ells’ literacy development in English and Spanish. We use the DRA Reading Analysis to measure the ELLs’ letter identification, phonemic awareness and word recognition. The DRA and EDL are used to assess the ELLs’ reading behaviors in English and Spanish. 0  All Ell's are assessed mid-year using the DRA to determine whether or not they are meting the reading benchmarks. Towards the end of the school year, they are again assessed using the school- made baselines , DRA, and EDL. The Ell's in first grade are assessed using the DRA and EDL two times a year. Some of them might be assessed more often if they are struggling with learning to read. The Estrellita program , a Spanish Accelarated Reading Program is use as an assessment tool, especially to assess and support our sife students. All ELLs entering our school are assessed using the DRA and/or EDL to determine their reading abilities to establish a baseline reading level at the beginning of the year. The goal is to determine whether or not the ELL is on grade level in English and/or Spanish reading so that appropriate instruction can be provided. At the end of the school year, all the Ell's are assessed using the DRA and EDL. The majority of the Ell's in the transitional bilingual program are at or above grade level in reading in Spanish. In English, their reading levels will vary depending on their time of entering into the ENL program. Overall, the Ell's are at the beginning literacy level when they first enter the school in kindergarten and first grade. As they progress to the second and third grade, they start developing stronger reading skills. Based on the early literacy assessment data, 60-75% of entering Ell's in kindergarten and 65% of the entering Ell's in first grade are at the beginning literacy level. About 50% of all Ell's enter first grade with complete letter recognition and phonemic awareness in their native language. With the English reading levels gathered for the Ell's in the third grade TBE and ESL programs, the data show that their English reading levels are about the same: 60-75% of Ell's in the bilingual program are at the beginning and intermediate levels and 100% of Ell's in the ENL program are at the beginning and intermediate levels. It seems that in this grade the Ell's in the ENL program read at a little higher level. The data seem to confirm the current research that a solid L1 leads to a stronger L2 and that reading skills can be transferred from the first language to the second language. Our school builds our Ell's native language proficiency as much as we can so that the acquired literacy skills of the native language can be transferred to the acquisition of the second language, i.e., English. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? We have an Assessment Calendar in place for the 2018-19 school year to ensure that Ell's are being assessed and that data inquiry work is taking place throughout the school year. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? To evaluate the success of our programs for Ells, we make sure we use formal and informal assessments throughout the year to monitor them. At the beginning of the year, we look carefully at result of the New York State performance assessments the ELA, Math, Science and NYSESLAT scores. We use the results to provide teachers and administrators detailed information to plan instruction, staff development, as well as academic intervention instruction and RTI to support our Ells. In addition to NYS and NYC formal assessments, we assess our students regularly using DRA and instructional unit assessments aligned to our common core curriculum in all subject areas. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? We currently have two ENL providers that will ensure that students are receiving the needed interventions based on their current levels of performance. Additionally, students will be selected to participate in our ELL Academy that will take place after school on Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays from 2:30-5:00 pm until May 2019. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] We use data to guide and improve the quality of our core instruction and to make sure that our students have quality opportunities to receive targeted instruction that matches their needs. If students are having difficulty, we either provide additional support for the teacher Core Instruction with new research-based practices to improve the delivery of effective instruction or we provide Tier 2 or Tier 3 intervention depending on the number of students showing difficulty. We also look at other factors to be addressed like family dynamics, motivation, or health issues to provide appropriate support. Our school uses data to guide instruction for Ell's in many ways. First, teachers analyze the data to identify struggling students in their classes, if the majority of them are showing little progress then teachers focus on improving core instruction. After, we examined achievement at the classroom level, the next step is to gather specific information about the students' classrooms 1  experiences, and their home and community context in order to support their needs. We analyze data through a language acquisition lens to make sure the students needs are not confused with a learning disability. Then, we design and implement targeted supplemental support and we use assessments to monitor the effectiveness of the supports. Our AIS program targets Ell's students in the button 1/3 of the school population in grades 3-5. Students who scored level 2 or below on the ELA and Math State Exam are identified and placed in the AIS program . This program uses the Intervention by Design Data Management Program to assess and drive instruction. This program provides the students with support in the development of phonemics awareness, phonics instruction, vocabulary development, reading comprehension and fluency. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. As of now the information on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT grades are not available to address this question. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Ell team of teachers will meet weekly during common planning time to address instructional shifts based on current student performance. Our Ell team will ensure that assessment data is used effectively as a tool to drive instruction in the classrooms. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our ELL population is provided with the mandated services as per CR Part 154. 2. mostly through heterogeneous grouping. In all ENL classes students are provided integrated and standalone ENL mandated services according to their English proficiency level. Through the Stand-Alone instruction students receive support to develop English language skills so they can succeed in core content courses. In addition, Integrated instruction is provided to build English language skills through the content area instruction. As for the ENL pull-out and push-in programs, the grouping is mainly based on the students’ English proficiency levels and grades. Every effort is made to group students according to their language needs. b. TBE program. If applicable. c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? In order to ensure that all students receive the mandated instructional minutes from Part 154, our school makes sure that we meet the staffing requirements to provide these services. All students receive ENL services regardless of Ell program. All bilingual programs incorporate ENL, ELA, and HLA into their daily instructional day. ENL, ELA and HLA instructional minutes are integrated throughout the content area instruction over the course of the day. Students at the beginner, Entering, Low Intermediate and Emergent receive 360 minutes of ENL per week and 90 minutes of ENL/ELA per day. The intermediate, transitioning, Advanced and Expanding receive 180 minutes of ENL and at least 180 minutes of ENL/ELA. Proficient and Commanding Ell's receive 90 minutes of ENL/ELA or other content area. Also in the bilingual 2  transitional program students who are entering, emerging, transitioning, and expanding receive one Home Language Arts class and at least two subjects in the native language at the beginning levels. Our Freestanding ENL program is a majority push-in model with co-teaching. Nearly all students in the ENL program are grouped into one heterogeneous class on the grade and the ENL teachers work with the classroom teacher to adapt and enrich instruction, creating comprehensible input. The minutes of mandated services provided to students depend on their English proficiency levels. All students receive a specified amount of standalone and integrated ENL. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. At this time, we are waiting for the NYSESLAT results in order to determine what programs models we will have in place and to decide what methods and instructional approaches will better enhance those programs. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? A variety of assessment tools are in place to evaluate our Ell's in their native language, Spanish. All new entrants whose HLIS responses indicate a home language of Spanish and who are newly identified as ELLS based on NYSITELL results the Spanish LAB is administered at the time of initial enrollment. This test is used to support in instructional planning in providing bilingual and English as a new language services to the students. In Kindergarten, first and second grade, the Estrellita Program is used to assess the basic literacy skills such as letter recognition, sound correspondence, sight words and so on. Kindergarten students are also assessed using EDL and EDL2, the Spanish version of DRA and DRA2. In all the other grades all Ell's in the bilingual classes are evaluated at three different benchmarks throughout the year (beginning, middle, end) in Spanish through the DRA assessment. These evaluations consist of running records with reading comprehension passages. . In addition, they take modified assessments in Spanish, particularly in Mathematics: quizzes, end-of-unit assessments (Go Math Program) and state exams such as math and science. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status To differentiate instruction for the various subgroups, ENL and classroom teachers use a variety of methods. It is important to note that effective differentiation always begins with assessment and is content area specific. For example, it is possible to have a newcomer who has instructional needs similar to an ELL who has been here for 4-6 years. However, as a whole the various ELL subgroups do tend to have similar needs as they move along in their years of service. Scaffolding is done throughout all subgroups. The ENL teacher aids the classroom teacher in making these lesson adaptations. All ENL lessons include a language and content objective. ENL and bilingual classroom teachers work together to develop language objectives that fit into the overarching objective of the lesson. An effective language objective may include vocabulary instruction, grammar structures, or language forms. Continuous and ongoing explicit vocabulary instruction is essential when working with Ell's. Successful vocabulary instruction includes five essential components: intentional word instruction, direct instruction in word meaning, modeling strategies or processes for learning new words, multiple exposure to the new words and a system to track new vocabulary. Following these five components ensure a systematic approach to vocabulary instruction. In addition, teachers constantly link new learning to background knowledge. Activating prior knowledge is essential to link new learning to prior learning. Current brain research supports this fact showing “that learning is increased when the students can directly relate new concepts and skills to something they already know or have had some experience with. (Welch, 2009)” Teachers not only use shared classroom experiences to link new learning to prior knowledge, but they also tap into students’ personal backgrounds and experiences. A. The general needs of the newcomer Ell's focus more on oral language development. First and foremost, teacher attitude is essential when working with newcomer Ell's. Teachers must work to lower the affective filter and to create a risk 3  free environment where the students feel comfortable and will be more willing to participate. Teachers achieve this by showing a genuine interest in their students, their language and culture. Teachers plan for plenty of structured group work where the newcomer students will have a chance to work with English proficient students or ELL students who have been in the country for more than four years. By pairing students in this manner, newcomers have an opportunity to improve the basic interpersonal communication skills, as well as develop oral academic language. In the structured group work, teachers provide students with sentence frames to lower anxiety around speaking, to give students grammatically correct language, and to encourage academic conversations. If need be, students are allowed to verbalize in their native language first and then work with in their partnership to translate their responses. Also, if the teacher speaks the child’s native language, they can accept the verbalization in the native language. Grammatical and pronunciation errors are not over-corrected, allowing students to feel more confident in their productive skills. To correct spoken or written errors, teachers model appropriate language usage at all times. Students can use gestures, pantomime or drawings to respond to questions. Teachers work with the class to encourage an atmosphere of acceptance, where students feel comfortable sharing their cultures and backgrounds. For Ell's in the Developing level, instruction is differentiated in various ways. Nearly all of the Ell's who fall into this category are in an ENLL program and are at an intermediate or advanced level, with a transitioning or advanced level in listening and speaking. Students receive extensive preparation for the NYSESLAT exam during the school day through ENL, ELA and HLA through our core curriculum. In addition, like the newcomer group, students are provided with extensive opportunities for structured group interactions. Overall, ELL students with four to six years of service or long-term ELLS need extensive support in developing reading and writing skills. To support students in reading, teachers do guided reading during the literacy block. Guided reading provides time during the school day for direct reading instruction, focusing on reading strategies. During the guided reading period, students develop as individual readers as they are given the opportunity to develop and use reading strategies. They have a chance to experience success in reading for meaning and learn how to problem solve with the new text independently. Teachers also benefit from the guided reading time as they are able to observe individual students as they problem solve new texts and have a chance to assess individual students using running records. In addition to guided writing, teachers use various reading strategies to attack tricky texts. Teachers follow the before reading, during reading and after reading model. Proficient readers use this model every time they interact with a text. Interacting with the text before reading allows readers to evoke relevant thoughts, memories, and associations which will help them to comprehend the text. Before reading activities may include activating prior knowledge through a question about a personal experience, making a brainstorming web based on a story’s title, or a preview and predict strategy. An adept reader is constantly interacting with a text during reading, creating an ongoing dialog with the author to mentally paraphrase what the author is saying. They check and monitor understanding through imagining, inferring, predicting, and confirming. Finally, new information learned is linked with prior knowledge, which leads to real learning. During reading, students can use the GIST summarizing strategy, make connections, use visualization, or practice self-monitoring strategies. After reading, strategic readers summarize and reflect on what they have read. They also apply new ideas from the text to broader world perspectives. After reading activities include reflections and responses. Children can respond to a text by rewriting the ending, designing a new cover, or writing a letter to the author. To support students with the productive skill of writing, teachers use process writing in a variety of genres. Using genres is essential when teaching writing to Ell's because each genre has its own characteristics: a specific purpose, an overall structure, and specific linguistic features. These characteristics of each genre are shared and understood by the members of the culture (Gibbons 2002). When the students are immersed in the specific genres, their understanding of the writing is enhanced, as specific writing skills are all taught within an explicit context. The writing process is used because “it puts the learner at the center of the learning process (Gibbons 2002).” The context of the writing is further embedded in the students’ minds, increasing comprehension around the genre in which the students are writing. To scaffold genre process writing successfully, teachers of Ell's use modeled, shared and guided writing practices. In these approaches the teacher and children work together to compose the specific writing piece. Children provide the ideas and the teacher supports the process as a scribe, typically writing about a shared class experience whenever possible. The teacher 4  provides full support, modeling and demonstrating the process of putting children's ideas into written language. In this way the text becomes richer, as the entire class is working on the piece together. Then, students used the skills learned in a particular lesson to apply them to their own writing pieces. All of our SIFE students are in our ENL program. Differentiation for the SIFE is handled at the classroom level, by the ENL and Common branch teacher. Much like the classroom adaptations for the newcomers, teachers lower the affective filter, creating a risk free environment. Teachers also help students to adjust to school life through creating regular classroom routines. . In addition to the small-group instruction during the school day to address their social and academic needs, these students will also receive extended instructional time. The extended instructional time can be offered through after-school classes or tutoring, Saturday programs, and/or summer programs. In all these programs, scaffolding strategies such as contextualization and schema building will be used for significant ENL and academic development. Former ELLS after two years of exiting the ELL status, are place in regular monolingual or ENL classes where they receive 90 minutes a week of integrated ENL for two years after testing out. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ENL services for our Ell's in the special education program are adapted based on the students’ needs as per their IEPs. They are provided English language services through an ENL push-in/pull-out program. Differentiated instruction includes development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in English through guided reading and writing groups, heterogeneous group work, and scaffolding the academically rigorous curriculum. In addition, students use the AWARD reading program. It is a comprehensive program for teaching and assessing literacy, with a strong technology component. The AWARD Reading program successfully provides individualized instruction using technology to improve the literacy of the digital native. With more than 10 years of research showing its effectiveness with students in a special education program, it is producing quantifiable gains with our population. It is an all-encompassing program that features assisting technology, differentiated instruction, and educational materials that engage students at all levels.ENL services for our Ell's in the special education program are adapted based on the students’ needs as per their IEPs. They are provided English language services through an ENL push-in/pull-out program. Differentiated instruction includes development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in English through guided reading and writing groups, heterogeneous group work, and scaffolding the academically rigorous curriculum. Our Special Education students have Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) and receive services through the school’s Special Education program, which provides students with the least restrictive environment consistent with their individual needs. A full-time IEP teacher, Ms. Spence monitors the implementation of each student’s plan. ICT, mainstreaming, and Special Education Teacher Support Services (SETSS) are instrumental in achieving our goals. The ICT program places Special Education students in General Education classes full time, while maintaining a student-teacher ratio of 12:1 (two teachers are assigned to each ICT classes). Students are placed in the ICT program through IEP's, teacher input, and review by Special Education Coordinator. This program allows special education students to receive departmental instruction from licensed specialists in each subject, and also to interact fully with their peers. In working with our Special Needs Ell's, the instruction is prescribed in a manner that accommodates the student’s exceptionally. Instruction is provided within a relevant cultural context so that the students can understand expectations. Our Special Education teachers work together to develop lessons and materials appropriate to student needs, modify unit lessons and materials, evaluate the student progress, and develop individual plans and materials as needed. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? As per our ELL-SWDs students' needs and IEP recommendations, we offer one ICT (Integrated Co- Teaching) classes in each grade, and three self-contained classes, mixed grades. In ICT classes, Special Educators are paired with content teachers to provide support as mandated by students' IEPs, and two ESL teachers provide pull-out services to self-contained ELL-SWDs. By providing students with the instructional program recommended within their IEPs, students are ensured instruction in the least restrictive environment that also supports their English language development. ICT classes follow the same common core units as all general education, ESL and Bilingual classes. Self-contained classes, whenever appropriate, use common units as well, supplemented with texts and materials that meet ELL-SWD needs. 5  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. We have many subgroups of Ell's within our school. So, in order to increase the percentage of students meeting promotional standards, all Ell's that have taken the New York State exams are targeted for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), after-school and enrichment programs. Our main intervention program for our Ell's in our Title III program. We are offering four different extended day classes to meet the diverse needs of our ELL population. The students in the first and second grade ENL classes will form one group and the students in the fourth and fifth grade will form another group. Another extended day group will be comprised of newcomer students in grades 3 through 5. The last two groups will be made up of third and fourth grade students in the ENL program. They will be grouped by NYSESLAT level, one group of intermediate students and the other group of advanced students. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school Instructional team and the SLT team will carefully analyze our school data to see what changes need to be made. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? None. Our school will continue to provide programs and services as per ELL population, parent choice, and students English proficiency levels. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We have many subgroups of Ell's within our school. So, in order to increase the percentage of students meeting promotional standards, all Ell's that have taken the New York State exams are targeted for Academic Intervention Services (AIS), after-school and enrichment programs. Our AIS program is designed for students who are at risk of academic failure, as well as SIFE students or those students performing at Levels 1 and 2 on English or mathematics state standardized exams. Teachers identify and provide individualized instruction to the targeted population. AIS services are also offered to Ell's, where an ENL teacher works with students approximately one period per week in either a push-in or pull-out model. Our after-school program is offered through an extended school-day program designed for all Ell's and Special Needs students. The program provides extra support to our students in the areas of reading comprehension, vocabulary and word analysis. It also provides our students with test sophistication skills. In addition to AIS intervention and push-in and pull-out support, all Ell's are invited to attend the Title III Saturday program. This program is held for 15 Saturdays in late fall, winter and spring for 4.5 hours each Saturday to engage students in intensive literacy and math instruction to supplement their regular school day academic program. Students use supplemental materials ordered with Title III funds to practice literacy and math skills needed to succeed on New York State ELA and Math exams, as well as the NYSESLAT. All programs are provided in English, with the exception of AIS and pull-out, which may to some degree require the use of Spanish as per ELL needs and proficiency levels. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Instruction in all these curricula is enhanced through the use of technology. Ell's have access to the same technology as the rest of the school population. Collaboration and interactivity with digital technology help improve student learning outcomes. Currently, all classes with Ell's have an interactive whiteboard in their classroom. The use of SMART boards with Ell's enhances instruction, making it more interactive and engaging. Our Go Math Program, Ready Gen all contain an interactive whiteboard component in their programs. In addition, students in second through fifth grade have access to notebook computers. The technology specialist, also has many other technological enhancements available to teachers of Ell's in the school’s technology lab. Teachers can use ELMO projectors, Flip cameras, digital cameras, camcorders and iPods to add technology into lessons and student projects. Also we were able to add 20 ipads in our ENL through the CUNY-New York State Initiative Bilingual Grant. In addition, our school has purchased a Rosetta Stone language program that allows students to use 6  technology and work independently on building vocabulary and basic sentence structures in English. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? In our school, Native language support, which reinforces the development of oral and written fluency, content knowledge, and the ability to communicate, is delivered in each program model. First, standards-based literacy instruction is provided in the native language and in English for the duration of our students' education. The native language and English are also used consistently to teach core academic content areas for the duration of our students learning. Further, since ongoing assessments of students in academic content areas, as well as language development, inform teaching and learning, we assess content-area learning and language development in the language of instruction and analyze this data to set goals and identify areas for improvement. Materials used include textbooks in the native language and technology enrichment in the native language. In freestanding ENL, language development and content instruction are supported in the native language in order to enrich comprehension. This type of support includes bilingual dictionaries, glossaries, native language classroom libraries, and technology enrichment. ENL teachers provide students with regular access to dictionaries and Spanish-English dictionaries, and students are paired and grouped strategically to meet students' needs. In addition, teachers with Spanish proficiency help ELLs develop bilingual glossaries, and ENL teachers seek support from Spanish-literate colleagues to develop bilingual instructional materials, especially bilingual glossaries and picture glossaries, to support the needs of beginner Ell's. These classrooms are provided with libraries that contain books in Spanish, French, and Arabic. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. All materials ordered are age appropriate and meet the identified needs of our Ell's. Materials are geared to address the needs of our students based on age, English language Proficiency and grade level. For example, high interest, low level texts, and books with picture support are ordered as needed. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Instruction in all these curricula is enhanced through the use of technology. Ell's have access to the same technology as the rest of the school population. Collaboration and interactivity with digital technology help improve student learning outcomes. Currently, all classes with Ell's have an interactive whiteboard in their classroom. The use of SMART boards with Ell's enhances instruction, making it more interactive and engaging. Our Go Math Program, Ready Gen, and all contain an interactive whiteboard component in their programs. In addition, students in second through fifth grade have access to notebook computers. The technology specialist, also has many other technological enhancements available to teachers of Ell's in the school’s technology lab. Teachers can use ELMO projectors, Flip cameras, digital cameras, camcorder and iPods to add technology into lessons and student projects. Also we were able to add 20 ipads in our bilingual classrooms through the CUNY-New York State Initiative Bilingual Grant. In addition, our school has purchased a Rosetta Stone language program that allows students to use technology and work independently on building vocabulary and basic sentence structures in English. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). When the ELL students arrives at our school, the ENL staff and the Parent Coordinator, Ms Sloan, and the school staff welcome the students and their families to our school. The students and parents are given a brief tour of the school and uniforms and school supplies are provided. Also the parents are introduced to the school nurse, who registered them in the clinic. Parents are provided with the Orientation Video and assisted to complete schools forms if necessary. Parents and students usually have the opportunity to meet the Assistant Principals of the grade. They are also given information about additional programs which are in our school such as AIS, Extended-day program for at risk students, Saturday programs, Title III programs, and After-school programs. 7  17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? N/A 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? Paste response to question here: Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our professional development program is extensive and ongoing. All teachers of English language learners are included in the professional development opportunities. The team of ELL teachers and administrators meet on a monthly basis for an hour and 45 minutes each time. During school year 2018-2019, we held a total of 20 meetings. The first two meetings focus of adjusting and improving the language allocation policy. The rest of meetings focused on instructional strategies, such as writing, academic vocabulary development, higher-order questioning strategies, effective instruction for Ell's using an RtI approach, developing and expanding oral language to support literacy learning and content knowledge and additional topics as the teachers feel needs arise. Our teachers of Ell's will also participate in various workshops on the New York State Bilingual Common Core Initiative offered through the Office of English Language Learners and the BETACs at our nearby universities, including Fordham University, Hunter College and New York University. Teachers will attend workshops on their own and then turnkey the information with all of the teachers of Ell's. In addition, our teachers of Ell's will continue our partnership with CUNY-New York State Initiatives on Emergent Bilinguals, a collaborative project of the Research Institute for the Study of Language in Urban Society and with the collaboration of NYC RBE-RN at Fordham University. Through this projects our teachers of Ell's will receive Professional Development on the topics of translanguaging, curriculum planning with emergent bilinguals, developing student's academic language proficiency differentiating instruction, and assessment with emergent bilinguals. Our teachers are trained to meet instructional goals set by our school, the NYC Stantards and the NYS Common Core Learning Standards. Our Ell's are challenged to meet the academic demands expected of the other general education students. Their teachers are given full support and training to achieve these goals in literacy, math and the other content areas. There are on-going grade and departmental meetings with our literacy and math coaches and other support staff. Modifications and scaffolds for Ell's are part of the discussions at these grade and departmental meetings. Our scheduled coaching sessions for teachers in the ELL programs (with articulation afterwards) are consistent with the training and/or focus discussed at these meetings. There are also meetings/study group held specifically to support our teachers in the transitional bilingual program. Teachers of Ell's also attend ENL/bilingual workshops offered by the Bilingual Team at our school. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. In order to facilitate the transition of our Ell's from elementary to middle school, articulation is discussed between the guidance and fifth and sixth grade classroom teachers, ENL teacher, and students. In addition, middle school workshops are held for parents in English and Spanish. Data on the exam history (ELA, Math NYSESLAT) are reviewed. It is our goal to help 8  students find the right placement for their middle school studies and ELL services in the middle schools. The needed ELL services at the time of the middle school application are pre-printed on the middle school application. Once choices are listed, matches are made to choices. Every effort is made to inform the parents of our Ell's about the middle school options that are available to their children. As per CR Part 154, our school provides ELL- specific Professional Development to all teachers. This professional development to all teachers is as follow: 50% of all total PD hours for Bilingual and ENL(ESL) and 15% of total PD hours for all other teachers. In order to facilitate our teachers to prepare to instruct Ell's, our PD will focus on the importance of native language instruction, language acquisition of a second language and/or strategies that effectively support the learning of Ell's. Some of the topics that we plan to include in our PD series are: the Bilingual Common Core Progressions, principles of language acquisition, co-teaching strategies, developing language objectives, that support rigorous instruction, academic vocabulary, and content area instruction. The Home Language Arts Progressions will also be part of our PD series. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? During the school year, we provide at least one one individually meeting with parents or guardians of English language learners to inform them and discuss the goals of the program, their child's language development progress, their child's English language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all subjects. This meeting is conducted by the ESL/Bilingual school staff including the school parent coordinator and a qualified interpreter or translator is provided in the language the parent or guardian best understands. If is necessary the unit of translation and interpretation is contacted. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents are members of the Parent Association and they serve on the School Leadership Team. They participate in school-led workshops, volunteer in classrooms, and assist with school initiatives. Parents including the parents of Ell's are involved in school events/activities. The majority of the workshops/orientations are bilingual (Spanish/English). In the instances when a workshop may only be presented in one language, it is shortly after offered in the other dominant school language. For parents that speak limited English and their second language is not Spanish, if there is not an individual in the building that speaks their language, the Parent Coordinator sits with them one-on-one and contacts the Language Interpretation Unit for over-the-phone translation. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 9 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Darryl Harrington, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 0  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: PS 306 School DBN: 10X306 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Daryl Harrington Title Principal John Hickman Assistant Principal Debra Sloan Parent Coordinator Martha Canales ENL/Bilingual Teacher Margaret Johnson Parent Brenda Diaz Teacher/Subject Area Yvelisse Perez Teacher/Subject Area Miriam Katz Rose Pacifico Coach Coach Bethsaida Bonano School Counselor Maribel Hulla Maria Guerrero Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Stephanie Torres Other ENL Teacher Brenda Diaz Other ENL teacher Yvelisse Perez Other ENL Teacher Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/18 06/29/19 6/29/18 1  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10X306 School Name: PS 306 Superintendent: M. Hulla The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Debra Sloan Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The methodology use to assess our school's written translation and oral interpretation begins during the registration process of all our students. At P. S. 306 each family is asked to complete the "Preferred Language Part" on the Home Language Identification Survey and on the Emergency Blue card data upon registration. The parents are asked to complete these forms where they choose the language in which they want to receive written information and communicate orally. All information is provided in their respective languages. These forms are used to determine the needs for written translation and oral interpretation. At this point an interview is conducted in English or Spanish by a trained pedagogue/ ELL coordinator and when necessary the translation and interpretation hot line is use to communicate with parents. The ELL coordinator interviews parents and administers the home language survey as needed. Teachers and administrative personnel are also able to access parent written and oral interpretation. Parent and teacher survey are also use to collect data to assess language preferences. ATS reports will be also considered to assess language preferences. Our Parent Teacher Association and our parents serving on the SLT provide us with specific information regarding the language need of our 2  community. Translation is provided during our all school activities. Translation is provided during our PTA, SLT meetings, conferences, meetings with teachers, counselors and meetings with the administrators. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English Spanish Afrikaans Bengali French Soninke 451 275 2 2 2 1 61.53% 37.52% 0.27% 0.27% 0.27% 0.14% 449 277 2 2 2 1 61.26% 37.79% 0.27% 0.27% o.27% 0.14% 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. NA Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Monthly school Calendar The school calendar is distributed September through June. Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Our school calendar is sent to parents in both English and Spanish. This document is translated by in-house personnel. In the event that is requested by parents who speak other languages, it will be translated with the assistance from the translation and Interpretation Unit or 3  Monthly Newsletters and frequently documents sent by the school such as school notices, family letters, letters from the principal September through June Yearly DOE Calendar/ Documents sent by the Chancellor September, December, January, and June ongoing school Messages/school emails Messages are sent weekly/monthly throughout the school year. with community members that speak the language. All our school correspondence is translated before it is distributed to our families in English and Spanish. All information about educational programs and services are translated in the parent's preferred language. We translate all newsletters, notifications of school trips, parent's handbooks, letters containing information about special school events, and material that are related to student, curriculum, correspondence related to testing and parent engagement activities such as meetings, parent-teacher conferences, Parent-Teacher Association and School Leadership Team meetings. Some of this information is provided in different languages by the DOE translation and interpretation Unit as well. The DOE calendar is available to our parents in all the languages provided by the DOE. If the calendar is not provided by the DOE in the language that the parents speak, it will be translated by in-house staff or by the office of translation and Interpretation. All emails and messages sent home are always sent in English and Spanish. Our school sometimes sent emails in other languages such as French, Italian, and Russian with the assistance of our in-house. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Parent-Teacher Conferences/ September interpretation service(s)? Translation and Interpretation is provided by our school as needed. Our staff is comprised of speakers of other 4  Curriculum Night/ Ell Parent Orientation Meeting November March May Monthly Coffee with the Principal Meeting September through June Parent Engagement Meetings Tuesdays School Monthly assemblies September through June Parent Workshops September through June Data Meetings, and Progress Monitoring October/January/ April languages than English such as Spanish, French,Russian, Italian, and sign language. For those languages not spoken by our personnel such as Soninke, Bengali and those languages not provided by the DOE our school uses the free over-the phone interpretation services. These meetings are in English and Spanish. Translation and Interpretation services as provided as needed and as requested by the parents. We use in-house staff to assist as needed. Interpretation services are provided as needed and requested by the staff holding the conferences and the parents. We use in-house assistance and the over-the- phone interpretation services to ensure we are providing interpretations services for our parents. Our assemblies are in English and Spanish. Translation services are provided as needed and requested by the parents. We use in-house staff and/or family members over the age of 21 to assist. All our parents workshops are in English and Spanish. Translation and Interpretation is provided by the facilitators and staff. During these meetings we are able to provide interpretation services with the assistance of our staff and the over-the-phone interpretation services. In addition, we use the funds allocated for translation to translate documents or to provide oral translation. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of a school emergency, emails, and messages are sent in multiple languages. Phone calls are made through our messenger system in English, Spanish, and French. The information will also be posted in our school website. 5  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. During our Staff/ Welcome meeting at the beginning of the school year, we inform our staff of Chancellor's Regulation A-663. All information and copies regarding this regulation is included and distributed in the staff handbook which all staff receive at the beginning of the school year. Our school Language Access Coordinator informs our staff of the services provided and they are reminded to contact her if they need translation during parental engagement meetings or for any other meetings. Our staff members are also inform of such services and mandates of the chancellor regulation by our ENL/Bilingual Coordinator. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) Our school will fulfill parental notifications requirements for translation and interpretation as mandated per Section VII of the Chancellor's Regulation A-663. We will provide each limited-proficiency parent with a copy of the Bill of Rights and Responsibilities which will inform them about their right to language services. This information is not only posted but it is also part of our parent Handbook. Also we post in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance the multilingual Welcome Poster of the covered languages indicating the parents of the availability of interpretation services. These sings are also posted throughout the school and specifically in the main office, security desks and all entrances. Our school's safety plan will include procedures in place for ensuring that important documents are translated and sent home and that we have a system in place for providing interpretation services during school hours. Parents are also made aware of these services during meetings, workshops and assemblies. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? In order to gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of the services provided, we conduct parent surveys during our Parent-teacher Association and school leadership meetings. We also sent emails to parents and we encourage them to email us with any concerns or questions they may have regarding to the school and quality of services we provide them. In addition, we look at the environment/learning survey to gather feedback from our parents on our practice, services and programs we provide. We also provide our parents with a parent school Manual in English and Spanish within it they can find information about their right to language services. We use all these mechanisms to further improve language services needed. 6 
