 75X352 School Name: THE VIDA BOGART SCHOOL FOR ALL CHILDREN Principal: LOURDES MENDEZ   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information The Vida Bogart School for All Children 75X352 School Number (DBN): 307500012352 K-8 1000 E TremontAve, Bronx NY 10460 718-328-3913 Phone Number: 718-328-5213 Fax: Lourdes Mendez lmendez5@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 75 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Lourdes Mendez Tameka Solomon Monica Morales Kevin Yarbrough N/A N/A N/A N/A District Information LouissaintKetler Superintendent: 400 1 st Ave. New York, New York KLouiss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 212-802-1500 Phone Number: 212-802-1681 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director: Jose Ruiz Executive Director’s Office Address: 1230 Zerega Avenue, Bronx, NY 10452 Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Lourdes Mendez Tameka Solomon Monica Morales N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Kevin Yarbrough ToshaLittle *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/Related Service Member/Teacher Member/Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Kenny Serrano Jennifer Coronado Athena Serrano Kisha Martin Luisa Escalera Member/Parent Member/ Parent Member/Parent Member/Paraprofessional Member/Paraprofessional Member/Parent Member/ Teacher Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Our mission at The Vida Bogart School for All Children is to create an academic setting where all students can learn. We will meet the needs of our students and fulfill our mission to maintain an environment where students become lifelong learners through a differentiated method specific to the academic and social needs of the students.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. P352X is a K-8 school with more than 500 students from grade kindergarten through grade 8. The school population comprises of 38.2% Black, 55.2% Hispanic, 2.7% White, 1.9% Asian and 1.9% other students. The student body includes 16.9% limited-English-proficient students and 100% special education students. The average attendance rate for the 2017-2018 school year was 91.4%. The Vida Bogart School for All Children was established in Hunts Point, The Bronx, in 2006. Now operating for over a decade, we can better reflect on the unique challenges our program experiences. What was an initial student population of roughly 275 students has bloomed to more than 500. An initial teacher base of 80 has grown to 105, not including paraprofessionals, related service providers, and support staff. Of these 105 teachers, 6 have less than one year of experience, and 15 have less than three years of experience. Our new teacher mentors, instructional coaches, and unit teachers work diligently to ensure that all staff share a common understanding of best practices, and how that relates to instruction, assessments, and student achievement. Some of our greatest challenges have included the hiring and retention of highly qualified and trained teachers and other professionals. By implementing more rigorous hiring practices and committee interviews, we have drastically reduced our late summer hiring needs and retained more qualified teachers. Over recent years through solid focus on increasing parent involvement, the school has shown strong upward trends of parent participation and satisfaction. P352X's Parent Coordinator has developed a monthly parent workshop plan in an effort to increase parent involvement and establish stronger family-community ties. Our parent coordinator has been working diligently to develop family-friendly, fun programs and events to support parents and families while establishing stronger school ties with families and the community. Creating meaningful and educational real-world experiences that strengthen family and community ties for our students is the motivation behind the many celebrations and activities in which our school community participates yearly. The following are some of the highlighted activities we have participated in this past year:  Our middle school students’ ongoing participation in the District 75 debate team has led to many successes in prior years. This highlights our ability to apply real-world context to CCLS standards, particularly those related to speaking and listening.   Our submission titled Community Helpers & Heroes at Work in NYC was selected for the 2019 VSA New York City Calendar. This artwork was selected to represent the month of August in the 2019 Marquis Studios / VSA NYC Calendar! This is the fifth mural P352X has had in a VSA NYC Calendar since 2013. Lincoln Center's Let Freedom Swing Jazz Concert Series program will perform at each P352X site three times this school year. Families are invited to attend. Fourteen elementary school teachers from across New York City were selected to join the 2018-2019 Met Professional Learning Community. Mary McGaw, one of our Art educators is one of these teachers. She’ll be using art as a catalyst for rigorous, standards-driven discussions with students. Collaborating with peers and Museum staff, she’ll develop lesson plans and instructional videos for the Metropolitan Museum of Art website. This grant-funded program provides her with a wonderful opportunity to hone her inquiry-based teaching skills with the goal of fostering visual literacy, critical thinking, and communication.   The work of one of our students is displayed at The Metropolitan Museum of Art. The piece was selected from approximately 1200 entries to be included in the P.S. Art exhibition. P352X has had 6 finalists, and multiple semi-finalists each year for the past 8 years. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  P352X exclusively serves students with severe disabilities. Our students have autism, intellectual disabilities, and emotional disturbances. Students with these disabilities display a range of academic, social, communication, and behavioral needs. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. In the area of rigorous instruction, after an assessment of practices, it became apparent that students and the school as a whole would benefit from a grouping system that differentiated students into specific classes based on needs and assessment outcomes, which are collected through a class profile sheet three times per year. As a result, a unique feature of our school includes a system that defines our alternate assessment classes across five sites by three colors: yellow, blue and green. These color bands are the foundation of our collaborative structure and curriculum implementation. In addition to providing all constituents with a common language to discuss our students and their needs, this system reflects a coherent set of beliefs regarding how students learn best. Color assignments align with specific curricula and teaching strategies focused on the needs of the group. The TEACCH Model provides the basic structure for all instruction in our blue and green alternate assessment classrooms across our five sites. Standardized and yellow classes use the Workshop Model. Color Green Blue Yellow/Standard Assessment Academic Student Needs Functional Functional/Academic ● The school provides the option of an 8:1:1 setting for students with autism. ● Color groups provide a continuum to move students toward LRE within our school and to ensure instruction is as uniform as possible across all sites. ● The school day was repurposed for the fifth consecutive year to allow for Monday professional development sessions. ● Monday professional development is targeted based on the needs of students in each color group. ● Our model for ongoing professional development and collaboration was recognized by the UFT and shared citywide through the UFT publication. All curricula are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and the Learning Standards for Career Development and Occupational Studies, and strategically integrate the instructional shifts. The school continues to deepen, expand, and refine the curriculum maps, units of study, and academic tasks to ensure a range of learning experiences across the continuum of services. Our methods and materials used each year are determined based on the specific needs of each color group. Additionally, units of study are developed across class color bands. All units of study are aligned to the school-wide instructional focus, "Students will implement analytical and problem-solving skills to investigate real world problems and apply these skills in the classroom and beyond." In our effort to develop a supportive environment that fosters the growth of trust and collaboration, we have created a culture for learning that communicates high expectations for all constituents, provides professional development opportunities for staff, learning opportunities for parents, and college and career readiness skills for students. This fosters a culture of high expectations for all members of the school community. Structures that support our school’s high expectations have resulted in effective academic and personal growth of students and adults. Our efforts will 1  continue to focus on deepening and strengthening our ties with families and the community through parent support and engagement. P352X will continue the College and Career Readiness focus anchored in our ADL classes by reinforcing skills needed for daily living and teaching our students, families, and communities how these skills translate into career-ready opportunities. Students will be exposed to various jobs and careers through in-class exploration with a culminating Career Day fair where students can present what they have learned. In partnership with Rethink, P352X is implementing a social/emotional learning curriculum across sites which includes significant professional development. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 75X352 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 01,02,03,04,05,06,07,08,09 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 478 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance N/A N/A # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 93.0% % Attendance Rate 92.3% % Reduced Lunch 15.9% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 1.5% 55.2% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 1% 11% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A N/A N/A 0.0% 0.4% 99.8% 37.7% 2.5% 2.3% 8 6% 8.7 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, in the area of Rigorous Instruction, P352X received a score of 4.12, 0.03 points higher than the city average. ● In NYC survey questions related to literacy, P352X scored 2% higher positive responses than the city average. ● Instruction at P352X is customized to students' individual needs, as per IEPs, student learning profiles, and data derived from class profile sheets, which are updated three times per year, data from quarterly report cards, assessments including SANDI, NYSAA, New York State Exams, Scantron, and curriculum-based assessments. ● As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, ratings of "Well Developed" were received for 1.1 Curriculum, 2.2 Assessment, 3.4 High Expectations, 4.1 Teacher Support and Supervision, and 4.2 Teacher Teams and Leadershhip development. ● In Standard Assessment classes, students at P352X demonstrated a higher one-year growth percentage in ELA exams in all grades 3 through 8. On NYS math exams, students at P352X demonstrated higher growth percentage in grades 4 through 6, but students in grades 7 and 8 did not maintain a growth percentage comparable to their D75 peers. ● Students in Alternate Assessment Classes at P352X continue to achieve high levels of mastery on the NYSAA exam, meeting or exceeding district averages for level 3 and 4 scores. ● P352X has developed a comprehensive curriculum map and units of study aligned to Common Core Learning Standards, and aligned to the school’s 2018-2019 Instructional Focus, "Students will implement analytical and problem solving skills to investigate real world problems and apply these skills in the classroom and beyond." The school-wide Units of Study embed critical thinking skills into the curriculum in support of this instructional focus. ● Our belief that students learn best when instruction is tailored to their needs, learning style, and cognitive level is evident in the three levels of classes we have in established at each site: Standard Assessment/yellow, blue, and green. A specific curriculum is in place for each color class. We have chosen curricula based on student needs determined through data analysis. The methods and materials used each year are established by an analysis of data. There are three instructional levels, each tailored to promote student independence and attainment of instructional goals. These instructional levels are considered a continuum and there is a system in place for analyzing student work and identifying the steps necessary to move students along the continuum from green to blue, blue to yellow, and yellow to standard assessment. 4  ● By analyzing data profiles compiled for each student, P352X has identified sub-groups of students in need of intervention. This allows us to provide focused intervention and programs for students with diverse needs and ELLs (through ENL instruction). ● Based on students’ instructional needs, we have selected differentiated curriculum according to three “levels” of student ability and student needs; at each level, P352X staff works to identify gaps in student understanding and skills, providing targeted instruction to address those gaps in student learning. ● In response to identified student needs, students at each site receive instruction in Activities for Daily Living (ADL) in an effort to support students in developing life skills and becoming college and career ready. Our units of study include Learning Standards for Career Development and Occupational Studies in order to work toward career readiness, beginning in the lower grades. ● At P352X there is vertical and horizontal curriculum alignment: each grade, at each instructional level, works on the same standards, but tailored to the needs of the students. Teachers at P352X are experienced in modifying the essential elements of the Common Core Learning Standards to meet students’ instructional needs. School-developed tools including the Literacy Foundational Skills Continuum and the Math Foundational Skills Continuum allow for multiple entry points for students to access Common Core Learning Standards. ● Teacher teams meet regularly in common planning meetings to analyze student work, revisit data, and modify instructional plans to ensure that students are engaged and are making sufficient progress toward instructional goals. The use of tools, including the Tuning Protocol, Depth of Knowledge, Bloom's Taxonomy, and CCLS “Essential Elements,” is encouraged to facilitate discussion and provide a guide to ensuring rigor in instruction. ● School leaders and teacher teams are experienced in using Danielson’s Framework for Teaching to plan for instruction that is rigorous and engaging. ● Teacher leaders, Instructional Coaches, and Unit Teachers have been identified to support teachers in implementing curriculum and instruction across school sites. Data supports the success of our model. In the Fall of 2017, P352X had 227 students on SMiLE and 208 on Fountas & Pinnell running records. By the Spring of 2018, the number of students using SMiLE dropped to 178 while the number of students on Fountaas & Pinnell running records increased to 238. In the 2017-2018 school year, SANDI FAST data shows an increase in the school-wide average score from 31% for the fall benchmark 1 to 52% for the spring benchmark 2. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, P352X will improve student outcomes in ELA and Math by 5%, as measured by student performance on New York State exams and NYSAA. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Administer assessments to selected groups of students: SANDI, FAST, Scantron, foundational skills continuums, Fountas & Pinnell. Analyze assessments to identify student needs. Analyze New York State Assessment scores to identify areas of student need. Identify students who are "below" and/or "beyond" mastery in specific areas, as portrayed on the Class Profile Sheets. Students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Assess student progress via Class Profile Sheets - Fall October, 2018; Winter - January, 2019; Spring - May, 2019 Assess students via SANDI and FAST in October, 2018 and in May, 2019. Scantron in the Fall of 2018, Winter 2019, and Spring 2019. Administer NYS exams according to testing calendar Monthly IEP PD sessions 6  Implement selected curriculum for targeted groups of students: Go Math!, SMiLE, Units of Study, Wilson, Fundations, First Author, iReady and Rethink. Implement AIS interventions for selected students. Students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Begin September 2018 and continue through June 2019. Review student data monthly Evaluate curriculum implementation through Advance observations Review site-wide data quarterly. PD plans reviewed: Week of 9/17/18 Week of 10/28/18 Week of 1/7/19 Week of 3/4/19 Week of 5/6/19 Support plans reviewed on a monthly basis (Sept. 2018 - June, 2019) All P352X teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers Develop school-wide and site-wide professional development plans with the School Development Committee: Identify staff in need of professional development through District 75 professional development courses; identify staff in need of support from mentors and instructional coaches; develop Teacher Improvement Plans for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; Assess school-wide and site-wide PD needs and refine PD plans; implement professional development on “Marvelous Mondays”; provide teachers with professional development in TEACCH, SMiLE, RETHINK, FIRST AUTHOR and school-wide Units of Study Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, mentors, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. n/a n/a n/a n/a 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator collaborates with each site to develop school-wide and site-wide parent/family events calendars and distribute monthly according to student and family needs. Implement “Terrific Tuesdays” parent engagement sessions to promote parent involvement and engagement and include parents as stakeholders; support parents’ involvement in the school community via open school nights, monthly parent workshops, and Parent Counseling and Training sessions; continue P352X “open door” policy for parents to visit the school at any time; continue to encourage parents’ active involvement in IEP meetings and share student progress with families through student communication notebooks, Terrific Tuesdays parent engagement activities, and feedback following parent workshops and parent counseling and training sessions. P352X continues to support families by promoting high student attendance rates; continues outreach policies through teachers, paraprofessionals, unit teachers, our Family Worker, and our Attendance Teacher. The Parent Coordinator created and maintains a school website designed to keep families informed of various aspects of school life. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO schedule accommodations to support Monday afternoon professional development sessions, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions, and the assignment of a unit coordinator in each site. School budget was aligned to include two Crisis Intervention Teachers, two Instructional Coaches, and an IEP Coach. Instructional resources include iPads, interactive whiteboards, upgrades to classroom computer equipment, assistive technology devices for students, purchasing curriculum materials and supplies to support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, students will demonstrate an average of 2% improvement in ELA and Math skills, as measured by student performance in school-wide assessments, individualized student assessments, and curriculum-tracking data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.)  Class Profile Sheets reflect student assessment and program data, including Literacy Foundational Skills Continuum (LFSC), Math Foundational Skills Continuum (MFSC), Student Annual Needs Determination Inventory (SANDI), Formative Assessment of Standards Tasks (FAST),SMiLE, RETHINK, Wilson, Scantron and Fountas and Pinnell Running Records. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? ● As per the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 95% of teachers say that students are safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room, and cafeteria. In addition, 95% of parents agree that the school works to achieve the goals on their child's IEP and 91% of parents agree that the school offers a wide variety of activities and services to help improve life outcomes for their child. ● As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, a rating of "well Developed" was received for aligning and refining curricula to students' Individualized Educaton Program (IEP) goals and student work data. ● In terms of access to LRE, the school's data demonstrates that over a five year period, P352X students have greater access to LRE both in terms of movement along the special education continuum and movement out of District 75 than the D75 average ● There is a daily procedure in place at P352X wherein staff welcome and assess each student on a daily basis. ● To support students’ interests, a variety of clubs and student groups are in place, including Boys and Girls clubs, an anti-bullying club, a gaming club, a book club, and an arts clubs. ● There is a behavior management system in place school-wide, tailored to the needs of different groups of students, supported by teachers, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, and Crisis Intervention Teachers. ● In partnership with Rethink, P352X is implementing a social/emotional learning curriculum across sites which includes significant professional development. ● The school environment is established to create communication opportunities for students using Preferred Mode of Communication (PMC); a wide variety of programmatic Assistive and Augmentative Communication (AAC) devices are posted and available throughout the school environment. Students use AAC throughout the school day and across school environments. ● Weekly and monthly events are held for staff and students to celebrate accomplishments or as culminating tasks of Units of Study. ● Each unit of study has a rubric, which is presented to students at the start of each unit. Feedback is regularly given to students and students self-assess progress toward instructional and behavioral goals. · In alignment with the school wide instructional focus, students are provided with opportunities to share their work with peers and receive constructive feedback through peer assessments. 9  ● Teachers design instruction that is tailored to individual student needs, designed to give students multiple entry points to access the curriculum. ● Teachers and paraprofessionals are experienced in adapting instruction to individual student needs, ongoing professional development in this area is addressed during Monday afternoon professional development sessions. ● Through the repurposing of the school day, there is additional time built in to the school schedule for professional development, parent engagement and teacher team work. ● Daily and weekly outreach regarding attendance is done by the Attendance Teacher, Family Worker, school aides and unit teachers. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, P352X will continue to promote a positive school culture, where students feel safe, supported, and challenged, as evidenced by a 2% increase in overall student, parent, and teacher satisfaction rates, as measured by the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. 0  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Review NYC School Survey results to identify areas of need based on teacher responses. Develop school-wide and site-wide professional development plans with the School Development Committee: Identify staff in need of professional development through District 75 professional development courses; develop school-wide mentoring plan; identify staff in need of support from mentors and instructional coaches; develop Teacher Improvement Plans for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; implement professional development on “Marvelous Mondays”; provide teachers with professional development in TEACCH, SMiLE, and school-wide Units of Study. Implement coach and unit teacher support plans and meetings with teachers in need of support. Implement a schedule of intervisitations among groups of teachers. All P352X teachers, paraprofessionals and related service providers Analyze 2017-2018 Advance data: identify areas of teacher need in relation to Danielson’s Framework components. Conduct Initial Planning Conferences (IPCs) with all teachers, develop Teacher Improvement Plans (TIPs) for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; develop observation schedule. Observe teachers and give feedback promptly throughout the school year. All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Administrators, coaches, unit teachers, mentors. PD plans reviewed: Week of 9/17/18 Week of 10/28/18 Week of 1/7/19 Week of 3/4/19 Week of 5/6/19 Support plans reviewed on a monthly basis (Sept. 2018 - June, 2019) IPCs conducted 9/5/19 - 10/26/18 Observaton cycle begins following 1  Implement selected curriculum for targeted groups of students: Go Math!, SMiLE, Units of Study, Wilson, Fundations, First Author, iReady and Rethink. Implement AIS interventions for selected students. Support students’ social-emotional needs and development of extracurricular interests through clubs. Implement Social Express curriculum to support social-emotional learning in standard assessment classes. Students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Continue to explore ways to include alternate assessment students more fully into the school-wide PBIS system. Continue to develop and refine protocols for student self-assessment in all curricular areas. Ensure that all students are assessed promptly; ensure that all students are receiving mandated related services as per their IEPs. Continue to ensure students’ IEPs are aligned to individual student needs and to Common Core Learning Standards. Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. completion of each teacher's IPC. Class Profile Sheets - Fall October, 2018; Winter - January, 2019; Spring - May, 2019 Assess students via SANDI and FAST in October, 2018 and in May, 2019. Scantron in the Fall of 2018, Winter 2019, and Spring 2019. Administer NYS exams according to testing calendar Monthly IEP PD sessions n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement n/a n/a n/a 2  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator collaborates with each site to develop school-wide and site-wide parent/family events calendars and distribute monthly according to student and family needs. Implement “Terrific Tuesdays” parent engagement sessions to promote parent involvement and engagement and include parents as stakeholders; support parents’ involvement in the school community via open school nights, monthly parent workshops, and Parent Counseling and Training sessions; continue P352X “open door” policy for parents to visit the school at any time; continue to encourage parents’ active involvement in IEP meetings and share student progress with families through student communication notebooks, Terrific Tuesdays parent engagement activities, and feedback following parent workshops and parent counseling and training sessions. P352X continues to support families by promoting high student attendance rates; continues outreach policies through teachers, paraprofessionals, unit teachers, our Family Worker, and our Attendance Teacher. The Parent Coordinator created and maintains a school website designed to keep families informed of various aspects of school life. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO schedule accommodations to support Monday afternoon professional development sessions, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions, and the assignment of a site unit coordinator where needed. School budget was aligned to include two Crisis Intervention Teachers, two Instructional Coaches, and an IEP Coach. Instructional resources include iPads, interactive whiteboards, upgrades to classroom computer equipment, assistive technology devices for students, purchasing curriculum materials and supplies to support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, P352X will demonstrate a 1% increase of overall satisfaction rates of parents, teachers, and students, as measured by parent attendance at school events and surveys completed by parents following workshops and events. By June 2019, P352X will continue to promote a positive school culture, where students feel safe, supported, and challenged, as evidenced by a 2% increase in overall student, parent, and teacher satisfaction rates, as measured by the 2018-2019 NYC School Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Attendance at school events  Surveys completed by parents 3  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Overall Advance ratings across all domains show that 47% of teachers earned a rating of highly effective and 52% of teachers earned a rating of effective in the 2017-2018 school year as their overall ratings in Advance. ● In the Spring of 2018, staff at P352X voted through a School-Based Option in favor of repurposing the school day in order to implement 80 minutes of professional development each week for the fifth consecutive year. ● Monday PD sessions are developed and implemented by the School Development Committee and by teacher-leaders at each site. ● Teachers, paraprofessionals, and school leaders work collaboratively to plan for and deliver professional development each week to meet the needs of staff and students. ● Paraprofessionals have taken on leadership roles, leading professional development sessions for teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers. ● Professional development plans have been developed for groups of teachers and individuals. ● Teachers are provided with professional development in specific methodologies and curriculum, according to student needs. ● Teachers, paraprofessionals, related service providers, assistant principals, unit coordinators, coaches and other staff members attended over 200 professional development sessions on a variety of instructional topics during the 2017-2018 school year. Staff members then turn-keyed the knowledge they gained from these sessions during Monday PD sessions across five sites. ● Teachers work collaboratively in teacher team meetings and Professional Learning Communities to plan, design, and modify instruction. ● Instructional coaches, mentors, and unit teachers at each site support staff in implementing P352X curriculum. ● P352X teachers have been provided with a school-wide instructional focus, curriculum map, and unit plans to guide them in planning instruction throughout the school year. ● In teacher team meetings, there is a tuning protocol in place for evaluating student work: teachers present one sample of student work, present data in support of the task developed that resulted in the student work sample, and discuss the rigor embedded in the work with next steps. 5  ● In teacher team meetings, professional development sessions, observations, and discussions with parents, teachers are able to discuss what they are doing in the classroom, connect it to student assessment data, and present unit and lesson plans evidencing multiple entry points for students and increasing the rigor through Depth of Knowledge skills. ● Providers of professional development opportunities for staff are widely varied: staff attend workshops at the school level, site level, through District 75, and through outside agencies. ● Danielson’s Framework for Teaching is used school-wide to provide a coherent set of beliefs of effective teaching. P352X received a score of 4.99 and was given a rating of Well Developed on the Quality Review Measures (2017-2018) question, "How well do teachers wotk with each other?" The report states that teacher teams engage in collaborative inquiry that supports goals. The school's key decisions are influenced by an embedded distributed leadership structure and student work/data analysis. NYSAA scores directly correlate to the Quality Review Measures that speak to teacher collaboration and effectiveness as the number of Alternate Assessment students achieving Level 4 in Math have risen consistently over the last three years: 24% in 2016, 63% in 2017, and 68% in 2018). The NYSAA scores in ELA over the same three year time frame have risen from 15% to 41%. ● According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, P352X scored a 4.21 in the area of teacher collaboration, +0.22 above the citywide average. Peer collaboration (91 % positive) and cultural awareness & inclusive classroom instruction (92% positive) are strengths in this area, where the quality of professional development (83% positive) and innovation and collective responsibility (72% positive) are areas for growth. ● As per the 2017-2018 Quality Review, a rating of "Well Developed" was received in Teacher Teams and Leadership Development in the areas of effective teacher leadership, the systematic analysis of classroom practice, the analysis of assessment data and student work, and the integral role teachers play in key decisions that affect student learning. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Teachers will improve their teaching practice by at least two points school-wide on the ADVANCE Annual Professional Performance Review Overall Ratings by the end of the 2018-2019 school year. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Develop school-wide and site-wide PD plans with the School Development Committee; identify staff members’ strengths and areas of need. Identify staff members’ (teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers) areas of expertise, tapping into staff members’ skills to provide professional development for colleagues. Expand opportunities for paraprofessionals to act as training facilitators. Identify staff in need of professional development through District 75 professional development courses; identify staff in need of support from mentors and instructional coaches; develop Teacher Improvement Plans for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; assess school-wide and site-wide PD needs and refine PD plans quarterly; implement professional development on “Marvelous Mondays”; provide teachers with professional development in TEACCH, SMiLE, RETHINK, First Author and school-wide Units of Study. Evaluate coaching support needs based on the observation cycle; Provide teachers with ongoing support from teacher-leaders, coaches, unit teachers, and mentors. Develop and implement teacher mentoring plan; begin coaching meetings, class intervisitations, and unit teacher meetings; implement teacher team meetings to assess and analyze student work and evaluate student progress; maintain the P352X Coaching website for school staff to gain access to resources and collaborate with each other across sites. Analyze 2017-2018 Advance data: identify areas of teacher need in relation to Danielson’s Framework components. Conduct Initial Planning Conferences (IPCs) with all teachers, develop Teacher Improvement Plans (TIPs) for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups PD plans reviewed: Week of 9/17/18 Week of 10/28/18 Week of 1/7/19 Week of 3/4/19 Week of 5/6/19 Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Support plans reviewed on a monthly basis (Sept. 2018 - June, 2019) Conduct observation/feedback cycle following IPCs throughout the school year; weekly teacher team meeting feedback Conduct observation/feedback cycle following IPCs throughout the school year All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Administrators, coaches, unit teachers, mentors. 7  develop observation schedule. Observe teachers and give feedback promptly n/a 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups n/a n/a n/a How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. The Parent Coordinator collaborates with each site to develop school-wide and site-wide parent/family events calendars and distribute monthly according to student and family needs. Implement “Terrific Tuesdays” parent engagement sessions to promote parent involvement and engagement and include parents as stakeholders; support parents’ involvement in the school community via open school nights, monthly parent workshops, and Parent Counseling and Training sessions; continue P352X “open door” policy for parents to visit the school at any time; continue to encourage parents’ active involvement in IEP meetings and share student progress with families through student communication notebooks, Terrific Tuesdays parent engagement activities, and feedback following parent workshops and parent counseling and training sessions. P352X continues to support families by promoting high student attendance rates; continues outreach policies through teachers, paraprofessionals, unit teachers, our Family Worker, and our Attendance Teacher. The Parent Coordinator created and maintains a school website designed to keep families informed of various aspects of school life. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO schedule accommodations to support Monday afternoon professional development sessions, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions, and the assignment of a unit coordinator in each site. School budget was aligned to include two Crisis Intervention Teachers, an Instructional Coach, and an IEP Coach. Instructional resources include iPads, interactive whiteboards, upgrades to classroom computer equipment, assistive technology devices for students, purchasing curriculum materials and supplies to support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 8  By February 2019, given systematic feedback and support from administrators, coaches, and colleagues, all teachers will evidence an average increase of 2 points in their overall Measures of Teacher Practice scores, as measured by ADVANCE data, based on observations completed to-date. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Advance MOTP overall ratings  Advance ratings in Domain 3  Feedback from staff professional development sessions and PD plans created by the Staff Development Committee Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. ● Principals and assistant principals attend ongoing professional development sessions throughout the school year. ● On-site administrators provide support for the entire school community by providing instructional support, developing relationships with staff, identifying leaders in the school community, and providing staff with the opportunity and encouragement to grow and develop professionally. ● School leaders visit classrooms regularly to observe instruction and provide feedback to teachers. ● Instructional leaders and teacher-leaders are identified throughout the school and are empowered to extend support to all members of the school community. ● Administrators hold regular cabinet meetings to discuss new initiatives, analyze student data, and turnkey information from professional development sessions. ● The principal shares school-wide academic and economic data through the School Leadership Team. ● The principal is known by staff and students across all P352X sites. ● The principal provides professional development and guides instruction through the development of units of study. ● The principal and all administrators take a highly active, hands-on role in the management of the school community at every level. ● Principal has implemented school-wide safety initiatives to foster teacher growth and instructional achievement . ● There is an open channel of communication between the Principal and staff through regular meetings and UFT consultation. P352X received a score of 4.99 and was given a rating of Well Developed on the Quality Review Measures (2017-2018) question, "How well does the school allocate and manage resources?" Resources consistently meet student needs and are aligned to instructional goals. Student programs are closely aligned to teacher expertise supporting access to learning that leads to college and career readiness. ● According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, P352X was rated 3.83 in the area of Effective School Leadership, +0.11 points higher than the city average. According to the survey data, three areas of strength in terms of Effective 0  School Leadership are inclusive leadership (96% positive), program coherence (86% positive), and instructional leadership (87% positive). An area for growth is teacher influence (73% positive). ● As per the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, 96% of parents say that the principal promotes family and community involvement in the school, 93% of teachers say that the principal encourages feedback through regular meetings with parent and teacher leaders, and 90% of teachers say that the principal makes clear to the staff her expectations for meeting instructional goals. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June, 2019, administrators at P352X will demonstrate more effective school leadership by 5% on teacher surveys through extending instructional and social-emotional support to staff, as evidenced by Professional Development opportunities, "Marvelous Mondays" calendars, feedback from staff, coaching visits, and observation feedback. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Analyze 2017-2018 Advance data: identify areas of teacher need in relation to Danielson’s Framework components. Conduct Initial Planning Conferences (IPCs) with all teachers, develop Teacher Improvement Plans (TIPs) for teachers rated Ineffective or Developing; develop observation schedule. Observe teachers and give meaningful feedback promptly Develop school-wide and site-wide PD plans with the School Development Committee; identify staff members’ strengths and areas of need. Identify teachers in need of mentoring, coaching, and support from unit teachers. Continue to provide professional learning opportunities for staff. Align the school budget to support selected curriculum in support of student needs; to provide for teacher coverage for professional development activities; to best allocate funds to support students and staff in the classrooms Administrators, coaches, unit teachers, mentors. Conduct observation/feedback cycle following IPCs throughout the 2018/2019 school year as observations of individual teachers take place. Assess professional learning needs following IPCs, throughout the year, through the observation and feedback cycle. Led by administrators, coaches, unit teachers, and teachers, and supported by paraprofessionals, speech therapists, physical therapists, occupational therapists and counselors. Monitor purchasing weekly, review overall budget allocations quarterly. Administrators, unit teachers, administrative/clerical staff All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups All P352X teachers, working with students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups n/a n/a n/a n/a 2  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Engage parents as key stakeholders in the school community. Parent Coordinator and Activities Coordinators at each site collaborate to develop school-wide and site-wide parent/family events calendars and distribute monthly according to student and family needs. Continue “Terrific Tuesdays” parent engagement sessions work to keep parents involved and engaged; Implement Parents as Art Partners and Parents as Learning Partners programs; support parents’ involvement in the school community via open school nights, monthly parent workshops, and Parent Counseling and Training sessions; continue P352X “open door” policy for parents to visit the school at any time; continue to encourage parents’ active involvement in IEP meetings and share student progress with families through student communication notebooks, Terrific Tuesdays parent engagement activities, and feedback following parent workshops and parent counseling and training sessions. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO schedule accommodations to support Monday afternoon professional development sessions, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions, and the assignment of a unit coordinator in each site. School budget was aligned to include two Crisis Intervention Teachers, two Instructional Coaches, and an IEP Coach. Instructional resources include iPads, interactive whiteboards, upgrades to classroom computer equipment, assistive technology devices for students, purchasing curriculum materials and supplies to support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, administrators at P352X will demonstrate more effective school leadership by 2% on teacher surveys through extending instructional and social-emotional support to staff, as evidenced by Professional Development opportunities, "Marvelous Mondays" calendars, feedback from staff, coaching visits, and observation feedback. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress.  Student portfolios will be used to assess implementation of feedback given by teacher teams, instructional coaches and administration indicating teacher growth from unit to unit approximately 4 times per year  Revision of PD Calendars based on Teacher feedback   Administration Observation next steps Instructional Coaching notes 3  Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  In the Spring of 2018, the school held a School Based Option and voted in favor of repurposing the school day, allowing for 80 minutes of Professional Development on Monday afternoons and a 75-minute block of time of Tuesday afternoons for parent engagement activities and other professional work. This is the fifth year in a row that the school voted in favor of the repurposed school day.  The school holds double the number of open school parent conferences as per the repurposing of the school day.  Monthly parent events, workshops, trainings, and celebrations are held at each site.  At each site, there is in an open door policy – parents are welcome to visit the school at any time, without needing to make an appointment.  There is a Parent Newsletter and calendar sent home each month at each site.  Title III funds are used to implement an after school program for students and to offer parent training workshops.  Rethink is used for parent training at workshops and training sessions held several times throughout the school year. Parents have the opportunity to learn about the Rethink curriculum and are taught how to implement Rethink curriculum at home with their children.  Parent Counseling and Training sessions are offered to parents, as per students’ IEPs.  "Terrific Tuesdays", the repurposed time allotted for parent/family engagement, as well as communication notebooks, email, iReady, phone calls, Parent Counseling and Training monthly workshops and four yearly Parent Teacher Conferences keep several avenues of communication and conversation ongoing throughout the school year.  An online curriculum and resource, iReady, can be used effectively at home as homework, reinforcement, and a way for students to show parents what they are learning the in the classroom.  According to the 2017-2018 NYC School Survey, P352X received a score of 4.08 in Strong Family-Community Ties, higher than the citywide average by +0.34 points. According to survey data, outreach to parents is a strength (96% positive responses) while parent involvement in school is an area for growth (88% positive responses).  A score of 4.99 and a Quality Review rating of Well Developed was achieved by P352X in "How effectively doe the school partner with families to support student success. A culture of high expectations and accountability for staff and students is evident, as well as the communication of these expectations to the families of the students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the 5  identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. In the 2018-2019 school year, P352X will further deepen family and community ties by increasing parent and family participation in school events by 5% as measured by school data on parent attendance at school events and parent engagement and outreach logs. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Strengthen family-community ties by partnering with a variety of Community Based Organizations to provide parents and families with support and resources they need, including Medicaid Service Coordination, access to vision and dental screening, access to after-school programs and extracurricular activities for students. The Parent Coordinator works to assess the needs of families across the school community and develops a calendar of monthly workshops, including workshops offered by District 75, to support parents and families. Parents and families of students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Monthly parent workshops Weekly parent engagement activities Parent Coordinator will implement strategies, overseen by assistant principal Continue “Terrific Tuesdays” parent engagement sessions, as per repurposing of the school day. Continue to conduct parent outreach via phone calls and papers sent home with students, develop school-wide and site-wide plans for parent engagement activities during “Terrific Tuesday” sessions parent-teacher conferences four times throughout the 2018/2019 school year Weekly parent outreach/parent engagement activities Parents and families of students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs and in all subgroups Parent engagement activities are led by the Unit Teacher and Activities Coordinator at each site, supported by teachers, paraprofessionals, and related service providers. Survey parents and develop a school-wide schedule of Parent Counseling and Training Sessions more closely aligned with parent needs as per students’ IEPs. Assess parent/family needs and refine the Parent Counseling and Training Sessions calendar. Parents and families of students with disabilities in Standard and Alternate Assessment programs At the end of each marking period, Parent Counseling and training Sessions and parent engagement levels will be Led by unit teachers, parent coordinator, activities coordinators, supported by teachers, paraprofessionals, 7  Monitor parent engagement levels via Parent Coordinator's activity logs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement and in all subgroups assessed and addressed and related service providers. If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. P352X Partners with the following Community Based Organizations: Sinergia  Mercy Drive   YAI  Astor Day Treatment  OPWDD  AHRC  Birch Family Services  Esperanza Center  Cookshop - Food Bank for NYC Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. SBO schedule accommodations to support Monday afternoon professional development sessions, Tuesday afternoon parent engagement sessions, and the assignment of a unit coordinator in each site. School budget was aligned to include two Crisis Intervention Teachers, two Instructional Coaches, and an IEP Coach. Instructional resources include iPads, interactive whiteboards, upgrades to classroom computer equipment, assistive technology devices for students, purchasing curriculum materials and supplies to support inquiry work. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, there will be a 2% increase in rates of parent participation at school events and a 5% increase in successful parent outreach attempts, evidenced by parent workshop, parent meeting, and parent-teacher conference attendance rates, and data from Tuesday afternoon parent engagement activities. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 8   Parent participation data at school events, parent-teacher conferences, meetings and workshops  Data from Tuesday afternoon parent engagement activities and outreach Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Standard and alternate assessment students scoring level two or below on NYS assessments Mathematics Standard and alternate assessment students scoring level two or below on NYS assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) SMiLE: for students in alternate assessment classes grade K-5, develop students’ speaking, reading and writing in an integrated way. First Author -a comprehensive writingcurriculumthat guides educators to teach beginning writing skills to students with special needs including autism. Rethink -RethinkEd's curriculum is based on Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and provides support in academic, behavioral, and transitional skills. Go Math! is the common core curriculum with an integrated response to intervention used All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction All services are provided during the school day All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction All services are provided during the school day 0  Science Grade 4 and Grade 8 standard and alternate assessment students scoring level two or below on NYS assessments Social Studies Standard and alternate assessment students scoring level two or below onNYS assessments by alternate standard assessment. Rethink -RethinkEd'scurriculum is based on Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and provides support in academic, behavioral, and transitional skills. NYCCore Curriculum in Science -The elementary science program should emphasize a hands-on and minds-on approach to learning.This approach will allow students to practice problem-solving skills, develop positive science attitudes, learn new science content, and increase their scientific literacy. Rethink -RethinkEd's curriculum is based on Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and provides support in academic, behavioral, and transitional skills. Rethink -RethinkEd's curriculum is based on Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and provides support in academic, behavioral, and transitional skills. NYCDOEK-8: Passport to Social Studies- a comprehensive All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction All services are provided during the school day All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction 1 All services are provided in one to one and small group instruction All services are provided during the school day At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Standard Assessment, Alternate Assessment, and Astor Day Treatment Students with one to one paraprofessional support and/or behavioral intervention plans instructional resource that integrates the Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) and the New York State K-8 Social Studies Framework to support strong social studies teaching and learning. Therapeutic Crisis Intervention and Functional Behavioral Analysis: for students in standardized and alternate assessment classrooms grades K-8, both services assist students in identifying behaviors that prevent effective learning in the classroom, clinical support and follow-up are integral to these intervention services. Adaptive Communication Devices: for students in alternate assessment classrooms, grades K-5, for students with severe communication delays, symbols and communication devices are used to identify and follow-up behavioral disorders to ensure optimal classroom performance of students. 2  Students in the Astor Day Treatment program, grades 6-8, receive individual psychiatric and clinical support throughout the school day. Teacher schedules reflect weekly meetings with clinicians in the treatment of students with severe emotional disturbances in order to ensure positive student’s academic outcomes. 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) n/a 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. n/a Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). P352X has 25 Students in Temporary Housing attending our school, as of September, 2018. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 4 Students in temporary housing are identified upon student registration, when families complete the Residency Questionnaire. Additionally, we work to identify students whose housing status may have changed by asking families to complete the Residency Questionnaire again at any time when there is a change of address. Our STH Liasion works to ensure families are aware of their rights as per the McKinney-Vento Act: posters, fliers, and brochures are available at each of our sites in several languages; staff conducting student intakes and registration at each site is made aware of the fact that providing certain registration documents can be waived for students in temporary housing, and we work closely with the Bronx placement office and the Office of Pupil Transportation to support students' needs in terms of school placement and transportation needs. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 5  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools X Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. N/A - P352X is not a Title I School 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). N/A - P352X is not a Title I School Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A - P352X is not a TA School 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A - P352X is not a TA School 6  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A - P352X is not a SWP School 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. N/A - P352X is not a SWP School 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 0 0 0 0 0 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. 7  Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 8  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 75X352, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. 75X352 will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand 9  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 0  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 75X352, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. 1  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; 2  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 3  ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 4  ● always try my best to learn. 5  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 6  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: This year our Sundown Academy Title III after school program will help ELL students learn sight words and develop language acquisition skills through the Birch Method, Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA), and the use of technology. ABA instruction is a teaching methodology for students with autism and can be applied across all curriculum areas and programs including ELLs. The instructional focus of the Sundown Academy Title III after school program will be aligned to P352X's school-wide instructional focus, "Students will implement analytical and problem-solving skills to investigate real-world problems and apply these skills in the classroom and beyond." The theme of the Sundown Academy after school program will be "Sight Words Are All Around Me." The six ELL students with autism targeted for the after school Sundown Academy Title III Reading Program were selected based on performance levels from NYSESLAT and SANDI assessment. The six targeted ELL students scored in the beginning range of scaled scores in reading, writing, listening, and speaking as evidenced on nyStart. In addition, these students were assessed in SANDI and showed performance levels falling into the lower third in reading and communication development. Data shows that all six students were weak in reading and writing modalities according to NYSESLAT, SANDI and evidenced language acquisition delays. These six ELLs would benefit from supplemental ENL instruction from our Title III Sundown Academy reading program to provide the students with the development of language acquisition skills necessary to communicate and succeed academically. The Birch program and ABA offer students ample opportunities to practice their English language skills through the use of structured classroom routines, picture symbols, schedules and repetition. Also, the use of computers will help ELLs in language acquisition through language games and lessons in which students learn new vocabulary using educational technology. The targeted six ELL students to attend the Title III after school Sundown reading program are 6 primary school ELL students with autism, one ELL student in 3rd grade, four ELL students in 4th grade, and one ELL student in 5th grade. The student/teacher ratio is 6:1:1. The language of instruction of the Sundown Academy Title III after school supplemental program will be in English. The Sundown Academy Title III after school supplemental instructional program will run from Mid-January through late-March. The program will be held on selected Wednesdays and Thursdays beginning on the third Wednesday in January from 2:35 pm to 5:35 pm throughout a 9 week span for a total of 17 sessions. The Title III staff of the Sundown Academy Title III after school program will consist of one ENL certified teacher, one paraprofessional, and one school administrator certified in special education. The ABA programs and the Birch methodology have proven highly effective in developing language acquisition, developing reading skills, and promoting success for ELL students with autism. The school does not offer an ABA program during the school day and the Sundown Academy Title III after-school reading program will provide ABA support. 352X will partner with Birch to develop ABA techniques within the Birch methodology for ELL students with autism in alternate assessment programs. Birch Family Services, a team that focuses on helping children with language acquisition and other developmental disabilities, uses current state of the art knowledge. It is the leading expert in the field of autism. Research shows that ABA programs and the Birch methodology are highly 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information effective in developing language acquisition for ELLs with autism. According to the "Partnership for Accessible Reading Assessments" research shows that 1.3% of ELLs with disabilities were identified with Autism and that learning to read and demonstrating achievement is more challenging for ELLs with autism. “The challenge of learning English and having a disability adds another level of complexity to learning to read and demonstrating reading achievement (Mueller & Markowitz, 2004).”Through the use of ABA and the Birch methodology, incorporating ELL methodology such as Total Physical Response (TPR), as well as structured teaching, individualized instruction, ABA, the Direct Method, the Communicative Method (CLT), and Picture Exchange Communication System (PECS), our ELL students will improve language acquisition and socialization by recreating real life social and functional experiences designed to move ELL students towards communicative competency. Key Birch principles focus on students’ strengths and interests, an understanding of meaning, language acquisition, and student independence. The program is language-based and promotes the use of pictures and routines to encourage the learning of new skills. The Sundown Academy will establish an evidence-based autism program for ELLs complete with a brief skills checklist to assess each ELL student's current level of performance, and generate individualized program goals. The teacher providing the supplemental instruction will be able to access teaching interventions, and follow a customized curriculum path based on ongoing assessment. Through the Sundown Academy, the school will be able to integrate already existing assessment tools into the supplemental program assessment. Additionally, the program will address the following learning standards for ELL students, incorporating New Language Arts Progressions: NLAP RI.4: Determine the meaning of general academic and domain-specific words and phrases in a text relevant to a grade-level topic or subject area NLAP RL.4: Describe in depth a character, setting, or event in a story or drama, drawing on specific details in a text (i.e., a character's thoughts, words, or actions) NLAP SL.4: Report on a topic or text, tell a story, or recount an experience in an organized manner, using appropriate facts and relevant, descriptive details to support main ideas or themes; speak clearly at an understandable pace NLAP W.4: with guidance and support from peers and adults, develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, and editing. Methodologies will include Total Physical Response and Language Experience Approach. Technology will be incorporated into the program through the use of computers. Research has shown that technology can be used to enhance teaching and learning in schools (Fisher, Dwyer, and Yocam, 1996; Cummins and Sayers, 1997). Researchers report that technology motivates students, encourages them to take ownership of their own work, builds metacognitive skills, provides students with access to other cultures, and enhances classrooms as centers of inquiry, exploration and literacy (Toppings, K., 1998). Utilizing Title III funds, P352X will purchase supplies and curriculum materials recommended by Birch to support instruction for students with autism. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered 8  Part C: Professional Development Begin description here: In order to improve teaching and learning for ELL students with autism and severe cognitive delays and in keeping with the focus of the Title III after school Sundown Academy, P352X will utilize Title III funds to train all Title III staff in Applied Behavior Analysis for ELLs and Birch methodology, in addition to analyzing test performance data for ELLs. Training provided is based on the latest evidence-based practices which can be applied throughout the supplemental program and in the classroom supporting these ELL students throughout the school day. Training will be facilitated by a certified ENL teacher. All Title III staff of the Sundown Academy will attend the three professional development sessions: the ENL teacher providing the supplemental program, the administrator supervising the program, and the paraprofessional working with the program. Research demonstrates that ongoing professional development is more beneficial to promoting positive student outcomes than single-session training (Champion, R., 2003). There will be three after-school professional development sessions provided by P352X staff. Each will be three hours long. The professional development sessions for the nine week program will take place on the first Wednesday in January, the first Thursday in January, and the third Wednesday in March, from 2:35pm to 5:35pm. The topics to be covered during the Title III professional development will consist of the following: Session One: Training and Application of Applied Behavior Analysis Session Two: Birch Methodology for ELL Students with Autism Session Three: Using Performance Reports to Improve Instruction of ELLs Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Parents of ELL students with autism will be informed of the Title III program through outreach efforts conducted by the school. We will prepare letters in the parents' home languages, informing parents about our Title III program. We will describe P352X's Title III program, and will correspond with parents via mail, letters sent home in students' backpacks, and parent coordinator outreach. Translators and the DOE office of translation and interpretation services will be used, as needed. To enrich ELL parent engagement activities, a representative of the company Birch Family Services will provide training in January and March on Applied Behavior Analysis to parents of ELLs with autism. Specifically, ELL parents will be trained on how to incorporate ABA methodologies and Birch methodology to improve daily living skills and language acquisition in the ELL child's home. We are expecting 10-12 parents, who speak Spanish. The facilitators will be the parent coordinator and a representative from Birch. Basic training in ABA methodologies will be included, as well as the creation of chore lists for ELL students with autism and how communication can be fostered throughout activities centered on the student's home will be examined. Schedule and Duration: The fourth Wednesday in January from 10:10 am to 12:10 pm (two hours); The second Wednesday in March from 10:10am to 12:10pm (two hours). 9  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Topics to be Covered: Applied Behavior Analysis for Parents with ELLs; Creation of Chore Lists for ELL students with Autism; How to Increase Communication among ELLs throughout the home and family life. Name of Provider: A representative of the Birch Family Services How Parents will Be Notified: Notification will be done through fliers, parent phone outreach, and reminders (in English and student's native languages) throughout monthly parent workshops at each site. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) $8895.31  Per session  Per diem Purchased services Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. For After School Program: 1 teacher x 3 hours per session x 17 sessions x $60.65= $3093.15 1 paraprofessional x 3 hours per session x 17 sessions x $34.73 = $1771.23 1 administrator x 2.5 hours per session x 17 sessions x $63.45 = $2696.63 (PLEASE NOTE: ADMINISTRATORS' REGULAR HOURS END AT 3:00PM, THEREFORE PER SESSION WILL BE 2 HOURS 30 MINUTES FOR EACH SESSION OF THE AFTER-SCHOOL PROGRAM) For Professional Development: 1 teacher x 3 hours per session x 3 sessions x $60.65 = $545.85 1 paraprofessional x3 hours per session x 4 sessions x $33.17 = $364.87 1 administrator x 2 hours 30 minutes per session x 3 sessions x $63.45 = $475.88 (PLEASE NOTE: ADMINISTRATORS' REGULAR HOURS END AT 3:00 PM, THEREFORE PER SESSION ACTIVITIES WOULD BE 2 HOUR 30 MINUTES PER EACH PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT SESSION) 0   High quality staff 1236.60 and curriculum development contracts. $2234.09 Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. PARENT INVOLVEMENT (WORKSHOPS) $1236.60 two sessions of parent training workshops from Birch Family Services (two hours each session; four hours total) Birch-specific implementation materials: Sight Words Bingo Game - 1@$9.43 = $9.43 Learning to Sequence: 3-Scene Sets Game - 3@$6.28 = $18.84 Learning to Sequence: 6-Scene Sets Game - 3@$6.28 = $18.84 Learning to Sequence: 4-Scene Sets Game - 3@$6.28 = $18.64 Reading Comp Series (9 set) - 1@$70.90 = $70.90 International Wooden Traffic Signs - 7 Inches - Set of 13 - 1@$24.12 = $24.12 Velcro Brand Sticky Back Fasteners Black 15' x 3/4 - 20@$5.82 = $116.40 Dixon Oriole Presharpened Pencils No. 2 Soft 12/Pk - 49@$0.96 = $47.04 Flipside 2-Sided Dry Erase Board - Red & Blue Ruled/Plain - 9 x 12 - Set of 24 - Ruled/White - 1@$80.83 = $80.83 Big Box of Easy-to-Read Words Game - 2@$15.72 = $31.44 1  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. CVC Word Building Cards - 2@$5.14 = $10.28 Oxford Twisted Twin Pocket Folders - 8 1/2 x 11 inches - Pack of 50 - Assorted Colors - 2@$26.13 = $52.26 Staples Nonstick Top-Loading Sheet Protectors Heavy-Weight Clear 3.3 mil 8 1/2 x 11 200/Bx - 10@$10.79 = $107.90 Swigline Compact Commercial Desktop Stapler Fastening Capacity 20 Sheets/20 lb. Black - 2@$6.23 = $12.46 Pacon SunWorks Heavyweight Construction Paper 58 lbs. Assorted Colors 9 x 12 300 Sheets/Pk - 10@$2.82 = $28.20 Carson Dellosa Scalloped Solid Border Set - 156 x 2 1/4 inches - Pack of 4 - Assorted Colors - 2@$5.13 = $10.26 Big Box of Sentence Building Game - 2@$15.72 = $31.44 Staples ClassMate Electric Pencil Sharpener Blue - 2@$14.06 = $28.12 uni-ball Vision Waterproof Stainless Steel Tipped Roller Ball Pen - Micro Point - Black - 20@$2.22 = $44.40 Rhyming Words Matching Puzzle - 6@$7.52 = $45.12 Phonics Word-Building Puzzles Set 1 - 2@$18.84 = $37.68 2 Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Colorful Calendar Laminated Chartlet - 10@$3.14 = $31.40 Eric Carle Collection: Variety Pack - 1@$34.31 = $34.31 Staples 30% Recycled Copy Paper Letter Size 92/104 US/Euro Brightness 20 lb. 8 1/2 H x 11 W 5000 Sheets/Ct - 3@$30.39 = $91.17 Esselte Oxford Composition Book Black Marble Wide Ruled 9 3/4 x 7 1/2 120 Sheets - 12@$1.69 = $20.28 Newmark Sight Word Readers Set 1: Variety Pack - 1@$28.68 Newmark Sight Word Readers Set 2: Variety Pack - 1@$28.68 Sight Word Readers by Scholastic Teaching Resources Staff - 1@$104.59 = $104.59 iPad - 2 @$405.00 = $810.00 otterbox for iPad - 2@$34.19 = $69.80 apple pencil - 2@$86.00 = $172.00 Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL $12,366 3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 75 School Name The Vida Bogart School For All Children Borough Bronx School Number 352 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Lourdes Mendez Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Samary Rodriguez Teacher/Subject Area Jessica Beach (Coach) Teacher/Subject Area Elena Ertas (ENL Teacher) Related-Service Provider Jocelyn Hernandez(Speech) Superintendent Ketler Louissant Assistant Principal Steve Giordano Coach type here School Counselor Santiago Arango Parent Maria Aponte Parent Coordinator Erica Fragale Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) Wendy Quintanilla (speech) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 6 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 476 Total number of ELLs 72 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.13% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 1 2 4 3 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Alternate assessment students are assessed using the SANDI assessment. Additional assessments specific to students needs are also used including Fountas and Pinell, Wilson, SMiLE, and Rethink. These are used to assess reading, writing, math and communication skills. The data provided is used to guide the instructional program. As a result of the data from the SANDI assessments, the schools has developed a specific annual goal for student communication. The goal is to increase communication skills, as measured by specific items from the assessment, of 5% when comparing beginning of the year and end of the year data. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  Student progress toward meeting instructional goals is regularly measured through formal and informal assessment, and staff meet in teams to plan collaboratively. Teacher team meetings take place regularly, where teams employ a protocol to analyze student work and identify next steps. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Program success is evaluated using student performance data from NYS exams and data is collected to measure specifically targeted performance outcomes. The ELL subgroup data is observed in isolation to help us identify any patterns or discrepancies specific to the subgroup. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Summative data is analyzed to identify strengths and areas of need for groups of students and is used to guide the development of student groups, class groups, and to develop school-wide units of study. Data from summative assessments is also used to examine the effectiveness of interventions, to determine whether to continue or alter a planned intervention, and to select curricular materials. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The purpose of the RTI model in our school is to identify and diagnose skill deficits evident in assessment data. Prescriptive strategies are then implemented for the purpose of remediating the skill deficits. This same process applies to all students in the school, both standard and alternate assessment and ELL’s 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Data reflects that alternate assessment students perform better in listening activities rather than reading because it requires non-verbal responses. Data patterns across proficiency on the NYSITELL and NYSESLAT and across grades reflects that most of our students are performing as a entering. For students who were administered and were unable complete a modality and received a scored of invalid or no score at all, these students were classified as an entering. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Data from NYSESLAT and NYSITELL are shared with staff at regular teacher team meetings. Teams analyze data from these assessments to determine student groupings and guide programming decisions. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. P352X provides stand-alone and integrated ENL instruction as per CR Part 154.2. The Stand-Alone component includes combining students K-2, 3-5 and 6-8 at the same proficiency level in homogeneous groups. In the Integrated ENL component, the ENL teacher collaborates with the classroom teacher in an effort to provide maximum support of the student’s communication and academic skill development. b. TBE program. If applicable. We do not offer a Transitional Bilingual Education Program. c. DL program. If applicable. 6  We do not offer a Dual Language program. 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? The school ensures that the mandated number of instructional minutes is delivered in each program model through integrated sessions with content area classes and flexible scheduling, where applicable. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. The curriculum, which is integrated in most ENL lessons, is intended to meet the cognitive needs of each student through Total Physical Response (TPR), multi-sensory activities, art, music and literacy, in addition to the four modalities of communication listening, speaking, reading and writing. Our ENL teachers follow the NYS Common Core Standards and integrate ENL strategies such as TPR, Language experience, Scaffolding techniques, and use graphic organizers in order to ensure that students are meeting standards required by state and local assessments. While working with alternate assessment students, the focus pertains to expressive language through PECS, Mayer Johnson symbols, and /or speech therapy strategies used to encourage verbal communication. Read aloud and tasks are designed to assess reading comprehension across all academic curriculum areas. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? In order to ensure that ELL’s are appropriately evaluated in their native language, proper staff proficient in the student’s native language administers informal assessments in their native language such as teacher made pre-and post-assesment and informal observations. The bilingual psychologist also evaluates the child in their native language. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Long-terms, SIFE and newcomers are provided with native language support, academic intervention services (AIS), a school orientation, TPR and the P352X Units of Study. Our curriculum also includes additional instructional support through music, technology and art. Students receiving services for more than 4 but less than 6 years are being supported through small group and individual instruction, in addition to specific curriculum programs that further develop student’s literacy skills. Currently, we do not have students receiving services beyond six years. For ELL students that have reached commanding on the NYSESLAT, their IEP will be updated on SESIS to reflect their current status level. As per CR part 154. 2 theses students may continue to be eligible for ELL testing accomodations and 90 minutes per week of ENL services up to two years after testing out in addition, they can can participate in our Title III after school program. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? The ELL teachers use multiple curricula and structures including SMILE and RETHINK which provide scaffolded instruction directly linked to the common core learning standards. In addition, all teachers are trained in the TEACCH strategy which is designed to structure learning through out the school day. Several strategies for listening comprehension using read aloud and music, the use of visuals and have the students point to pictures or act out vocabulary, speaking slowly using correct English phrase, modeling, gestures pointing and showing as much as possible. Furthermore, teachers of ELL-SWDs make use of online subscription programs that the school purchases, along with links to free online programs, the use of learning apps on iPads, 7  the use of interactive white boards, and other technology to provide students with access to academic content that is age- and grade-appropriate. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our school uses multiple curricula designed to support the diverse population. Among these curricula are Rethink, Expeditionary Learning, Go Math, SMiLE, Fundations, Attainment, Wilson, and others. Classrooms are structured around the TEACCH model with on ongoing partnership with Birch. Students in 352X have the flexibility to move along the continuum of program options as the school has class ratios of (12:11, 8:11, 6:11) and in inclusive education (SETTS) 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. Our targeted intervention programs for all of our ELL (0-3, 4-6,and long term ELLs) in ELA, math and other content areas are aligned to the Common Core Standards throughout the Stand-alone and Integrated ENL program. P352X has established units of study in literacy, math, science and social studies all aligned with the state Common Core Standards, all aligned to the school's instructional focus "Improving Socializiation Through Real-World, Cross-Curricular, and Collaborative Experiences." Literacy programs for alternate assessment students used by teachers in support of these units of study include SMiLE, Attainment, Core Knowledge, Wilson, and Rethink. All are research-based literacy programs designed to target deficiency areas in literacy. Literacy skills emphasize language development across monthly themes throughout the school year. Content area curriculum includes the citywide social studies core curriculum and the science core curriculum. Art instruction is based on units of study aligned with the NYC Blueprint for the arts. Math curricula used by teachers in support of school units of study include Rethink and Go Math. All curriculum is in English; any native language support needed is given by classroom personnel including the classroom teacher, paraprofessional and the ENL teacher. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs throughout the school day and in supplemental programs. Title III funds are used to support an after school program to supplement instruction during the school day. The ENL teacher and paraprofessional deliver instruction in the afterschool program. The ENL teacher and a bilingual paraprofessional deliver instruction in the afterschool program using Birch and Rethink. Selection of ENL students to the program is based on timeliness of submission of application by parent/guardian. Throughout the school day ELLs participate, as evidenced in student schedules, in all content area activities such as art, physical education and technology. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? For the coming school year, special attention to reading and writing will be afforded to ENL students through expanded use of the Rethink curriculum.. All programs are for students in grades K-8 and research based. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The bilingual program was closed at the end of the 2017-2018 school year due to low student enrollment. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We are District 75 specialized school, where all of our ELLs are afforded equal access to all of the school's programs. The after school and supplemental service we provide to ELLs in our school is Title III. In our after school Title III program, students are selected and invited to participate based on performance levels from NYSESLAT and SANDI assessment. During this program, students are provided with strategies and skills that help with the language acquisition. The school send letters home letting the parents know about the afterschool program, they have to sign and return the invitation. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. To provide adequate instruction to ELL students in regards to language we use technology to the fullest extent possible within the school budget, which includes smart board, iPads, computers. 8  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Home language is supported through the use of instructional materials which provide our ENL students with great opportunities and the skills to success when acquiring a second language. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The schools ensures all required services and resources support and correpond to ELLs' ages and grade levels by meeting the needs of the students according to their IEP recommendation. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? To provide adequate instruction to ELL students in regards to language, we use technology to the fullest extent possible within the school budget, which includes smart board, iPads, computers. In our co-located sites, school staff work to allocate resources and develop collaborative relationships with co-located school staff. We share space and resources as need to ensure that all of the ELLs' needs are met. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The school provides the support of a parent coordinator in addition to unit teachers and school administrators at each of the five sites. These personnel support new students and families as they make the transition in the program. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? No language elective are offered at this time 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? No dual language programs are currently offered at 352X Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? The district provided our ENL/Bilingual teachers working with ELL students the following workshops: In addition to district professional development, weekly as well as monthly planning meetings are scheduled for P352X teachers and administrators. At these meetings, the ENL teachers are given the opportunity to participate in curriculum common planning, sharing assessment results, and discussing the needs of the ELL students in the classroom and school wide environment. Teachers working with ELL’s are also provided instruction in the use of Common Core curricula and special programs such as Rethink and P352X Units of Study. P352X requires all teachers, including those who work with ELL’s to collaborate in inquiry teams on a weekly basis. Teams work to review student work, improve teaching practice and integrate new strategies and concepts to support student growth. In addition, the school schedule allows for 80 minutes of professional development time on Monday afternoons. These PDs support teachers in delivering Common Core- aligned instruction by equipping each teacher with strategies, techniques and materials that we allow them to plan instruction that will support and meet the needs of the students. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. All Special Education teachers, classroom and clusters, and related service providers, working with ELLs and not working with ELLs, will sign up for the Jose P. Training given annually by the district. ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development through D75 workshops and coaching, in addition to our school's partnership with Birch Family Services for professional development in best practices for students with Autism. All staff receive ELL-specific professional development provided by school-based coaches and ENL teachers. Professional development sessions and attendance at these sessions are tracked through PD plans at each site, which include agendas and sign-in sheets for each session. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? P352X provides an open door policy for parents. Language interpreters are readily available at all times to translate and interpret communication. ENL and bilingual teachers are present at all IEP meetings to discuss the students' growth in all areas of the curriculum. The school has open school night four times a year in which the progress of the student is discuss. In addition, ENL and bilingual teachers schedule meetings with parents of ELLs at least once per year in order to discuss students' progress. Time is afforded to all school staff on Tuesday afternoons for Parent Engagement activities; this time is used by ENL and bilingual teachers to conduct parent outreach, hold phone conferences with parents, and plan for parent meetings and events. Records of these outreach attempts, conversations, and parent meetings are maintained by ENL and bilingual teachers in an ELL progress meetings binder. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. During the open house, the ESL teachers inform the ELLs parents of the services they provide. The open house is held on different dates at different sites. We also have parent teacher conference four times a year, where the ENL teachers as well as the Bilingual teacher show progress through data and portfolios of student work. The school also provides monthly workshops for families, and is a partner with Parent as Arts Partners. Finally, we have specific activities during our Title III after school supplementary program. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. 0  1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Lourdes Mendez, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: School DBN: Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 75X352 School Name: The Vida Bogart School for All Chil Superintendent: Ketler Louissan The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Erica Fragale Parent Coordinator yes yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. In order to assess language preferences of the parent community, P352X reviews data from the Home Language Identification Survey, Student Emergency Contact Cards, and ATS reports. In addition, we utilize the Parents' Preferred Language Form from the Translation and Interpretation Unit's website. During student intakes and regular formal and informal parent meetings, language preferences are discussed. These data sources are reviewed regularly to identify any changes in parents' language preferences, and to ensure accuracy. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Bengali Chinese Estonian French Fulani Mandinka Mandarin English Spanish 3 2 1 2 2 1 0 329 84 .71 .47 .24 .47 .47 .24 0 77.59 19.81 4 1 0 0 2 1 1 333 82 .94 .24 0 0 .47 .24 .24 78.54 19.34 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. English, Spanish Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Class information and bus info, curriculum memos, school calendar September Testing memos Ongoing throughout the school year; prior to scheduled testing dates Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. LAC collaborates with school staff to translate documents into parents' preferred languages; English versions of documents are created one week prior to being sent home in order to ensure sufficient time to translate LAC collaborates with school staff to translate documents into parents' preferred languages; English versions of documents are created one week prior to being sent home in order to ensure sufficient time to translate Notice of IEP meetings Ongoing throughout the school year, dependent upon student IEP compliance dates SESIS translates notices into parents' preferred langauge 5  Notices of school events, parent teacher conferences, notices of school closings and half days Ongoing throughout the school year; notices are sent home 1-2 weeks prior to any scheduled school event LAC collaborates with school staff to translate documents into parents' preferred languages; English versions of documents are created one week prior to being sent home in order to ensure sufficient time to translate LAC accesses translation support available on the Translation and Interpretation Intranet page 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to Open School Night/Curriculum Night September Parent Teacher Conferences November, March, May Parent Counseling and Training Sessions/Parent Workshops Ongoing throughout the school year Ongoing throughout the school year, dependent upon student IEP compliance dates IEP Meetings provide interpretation service(s)? During open school night, school staff provides interpretation services as needed. School staff also access the Interpretation hotline available through the DOE as needed During parent teacher conferences, school staff provides interpretation services as needed. School staff also access the Interpretation hotline available through the DOE as needed School staff provides interpretation services as needed. School staff also access the Interpretation hotline available through the DOE as needed During open school night, school staff provides interpretation services as needed. School staff also access the Interpretation hotline available through the DOE as needed 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In collaboration with LAC, school staff maintain records regarding preferred languages of limited-English-proficient families, as well as staff members who speak parents' preferred languages. In the event of a school emergency, parents will be notified in English and in their preferred language. Staff will utilize all available resources, including staff members to act as interpreters or translators and use of the interpretation unit telephone hotline. 6  Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Staff will be made aware of the goal of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 during weekly staff meetings. The Language Access Coordinator will collaborate with administrative staff at each site to ensure that all staff members are aware of both the goal and all resources available to meet compliance. The LAC will also remind staff of available resources prior to major parent events, specifically Parent Teacher Conferences and Parent Workshops. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The Parents Bill of Rights and Welcome Posters are posted at entrances, in the main lobby, main office and in key locations throughout our facilities at P352X. In addition, our school provides all parents with the Parents' Guide to Language Access. Multilingual Fliers and "I Speak" cards are posted in key locations around the school building. If these forms are not available in the parent's native language, a special request will be placed with The Translation & Interpretation Unit. Complete information about the Language Assistance Services is available in the main office of each site, and details are posted on parent builletin boards together with instructions on how to obtain translation services. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? P352X will gather feedback from parents on the quality and availability of services through parent surveys, feedback forms from parent workshops, and contact between the school's Language Access Coordinator and selected point-people at each site. 7 
