 08X377 School Name: BRONX COMMUNITY HIGH SCHOOL Principal: FLORA GREENAWAY   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information Bronx Community High School 08X377 320800011377 9-12 School Number (DBN): 1980 Lafayette Avenue, Bronx, New York, 10473 718-982-1026 Phone Number: 718-892-6941 Fax: Flora Greenaway fgreena@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Flora Greenaway Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Sheila Cousins James Elizabeth Lugo Francis Rollins Elizabeth Lugo Gary Souma Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Dawn Olatokun Geographical District: 08 Superintendent’s Office Address: District Information Paul Rotondo Superintendent: 197 ForsythSt., New York, NY Proton@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 646-654-1261 Phone Number: Affinity FSC: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Mariano Guzman Executive Director:   Executive Director’s Office Address: New York City Department of Education mguzman16@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (212) 374-0876 Blackberry/ Cell646 450-4107 Phone Number: 212-356-3702 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Flora Greenaway Sheila Cousins James Elizabeth Lugo LisandraVasquez Adriana Jimenez Gary Souma AyeshaYoung MarcelyGarcia ShanaVelez LisandraVasquez Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Parent Parent Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Maria Gomez Regina Then Courtney Kelly Christine Rivera Margaret Hunte PrashantSitaram Francis Rollins Parent Parent Teacher Teacher Teacher```````````````````````` Teacher Assistant Principal / /   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? MISSION STATEMENT   At the Bronx Community High school, (BCHS) we believe in creating personalized learning plans that re-engage our students in an alternative opportunity, as we provide, social, emotional and academic supports to foster their growth towards graduation and beyond. It is vital that the school environment is structured, so that clear expectations for student behavior and performance are consistently articulated and reinforced by all staff. We give transparent feedback in order to re-establish our students’ confidence in schools as a place of success. We take pride in developing critical thinking skills in our students, inspiring them to feel a sense of urgency towards making a positive contribution to their society. At BCHS, students learn best when their prior knowledge is assessed and built upon their understanding, connecting their learning in an authentic and relevant way as we provide multiple opportunities for college and career readiness. VISION STATEMENT At the Bronx Community High School, students learn best when they attend school regularly and are provided with an education that is relevant to their personal lives. Daily attendance is monitored collaboratively through New York City Mission Society (NYCMS), our guidance counselor and our house teams. Our goal is to work with these students and their families to provide them with the necessary academic and social-emotional supports that will encourage and enable our students to develop their leadership potential. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. BCHS is a transfer high school, located in District 8. This school is designed to provide over-aged and under-credited students who have a history of truancy, with the opportunity to pursue a quality education, preparing them for college and/or employment. BCHS operates in a joint partnership with the NYC Department of Education and the New York City Mission Society (NYCMS). Our population reflects students who: ● Have at least one year of high school experience ● Have a history of truancy ● Are at least 16 years old, and under-credited Our admission process also adheres to the following guidelines: ● 16 years old: 0-10 credits ● 17 years old: 10-25 credits ● 18 years old: 25 credits ● Are willing to participate in a small group and work individually with an advocate counselor BCHS/CBO/Community Partner Relationship/New Visions For Public School 0  The Bronx Community High School has created a robust partnership with community based organizations that have displayed fidelity in the work around youth development, supporting attendance intervention and dropout prevention as well as college and career awareness and readiness. New York City Mission Society (NYCMS) The New York City Mission Society envisions a city in which every New Yorker thrives in a safe and loving environment, contributes to the overall well-being of the community, and receives the support needed to achieve a joyful and independent life. Values New York City Mission Society values kindness, compassion, dignity, respect, and excellence. The organization demonstrates these values by delivering services that encourage critical thinking, self-confidence, and resilience in the children, youth, and families we serve, positioning older high school students for academic and career success. To that end, New York City Mission Society has created a partnership with the New York City Department of Education and the Bronx Community High School in providing opportunities for our students to achieve academic and social success. Learning to Work (LTW) programs are offered at four transfer schools throughout the Bronx, Manhattan and Brooklyn to support these students in their studies and prepare them for achievement in college and the work world. Making Progress For The 2018-2019 School Year For the 2018-2019 school year, the BCHS will implement a Literacy Plan for the school community, department plans and additional school-wide teacher teams. Each plan is developed as a catalyst for school improvement around the areas of instruction. The objective of this program is to deliver topics surrounding self-esteem, self-respect, safe sex, career goals and post secondary planning. Collaboration With Community Change Inc. The Bronx Community High School has been working with Community Change Inc. for the past two years, and will continue the partnership for 2017-2018. At the starting of this year, Community Change Inc. implemented the program after school. In 2017-2018, the program will be infused into instruction during school hours in order to reach a broader range of students. The Bronx Community High School House Teams The implementation of the House Teams has served to define the culture and climate of our school. These teams support our school infrastructure which reflects the goals and aspirations of our community. The effectiveness of the house structure continues to be most evident within in our environment. As we continue to review the data for our transfer high school, we will continue to implement effective practices and a rich youth development component to ensure that our students receive a meaningful high school experience that would propel them towards graduation, college and careers. Each student is provided an Individualized Student Achievement Plan that clearly demonstrates the academic course needs for his/her graduation, and provides the opportunity for each student to set personal goals. For the 2018-2019 school year, students will travel from house to house with their Student Individualized Plans (SIP) advised by house leaders. This will enable the new house leaders to provide the necessary intervention services that would tailor to students' individual needs; hence, demarcating a clear pathway to graduation. 1  New Initiatives: The BCHS has re-configured its House structure to accommodate the credit requirements of our student population. The re-configuration of Houses will enable us to provide the academic and social skills necessary for student achievement. BCHS has now embedded the practices of the new House structure into our Freshman, Sophomore, Junior and Senior Houses. AP for All Classes: The Bronx Community High School will now offer four Advanced Placement (AP) Classes in English, Social Studies and Science; the school will offer pre advanced placement classes in Mathematics for the 2018-2019 school year. Restorative Justice: During the 2018 -2019 school year, the Bronx Community High School will continue to work with our campus schools to engage in Restorative justice in order to develop coherent practices that will afford our school community another lens to approach justice by focusing on the needs of the victims, the offenders, and our community and encourage our young adults to develop empathy for one another. College Access for All: This school year, the Bronx Community High School will be afforded the College Access for All program which will allow students to participate in college awareness and readiness program by engaging them in collaborative conversations about college planning while in school and at home. Think CERCA: The Think CERCA program is a standards-aligned close reading and academic writing school-wide approach to literacy instruction, designed to prepare students for post-secondary life by building up their analytical skills in every subject. Mastery Collaborative: The Bronx Community High School is continuing the work we have begun with the Mastery Collaborative team which has afforded us the opportunity to shift the paradigm of grading and learning. 2016-18 Arts for ELLs & Students with Disabilities Grant Program, Office of Arts & Special Projects: Our grant program is designed to increase student arts achievement while targeting the needs of diverse learners, including students with disabilities and English Language Learners. We will continue the mentoring initiative designed to support our students in their social and academic development, which encourages them to strive for success. Our college and career advisors have aggressively reached out to students to emphasize the importance of college and career, which will increase the number of college acceptances. Pathways To College Seniors and aspiring graduates of the BCHS will be given the opportunity to visit college campuses to have an idea of where they may want to study after graduation. They can meet with a college adviser who can further break down the college admission process and discuss programs offered in different fields of study. Instructional Focus: Learning through listening, reading, collaborative conversations, and writing from sources. This school year, we have experienced an increase in the number of students with disabilities; in addition, we have designed a program to accommodate our new population of students in the Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classroom. In order to ensure the effectiveness of our work, we have refined our mastery based grading policy as well as our benchmarks which are both tailored to enhance the varied needs of all students. Together, we will work as a team, to focus on the following Key Areas in the classroom: 2  ● literacy across the content areas in order to engage students in daily reading comprehension ● collaborative conversations and writing from source ● The Workshop Model ● Multiple entry points to meet the needs of the varied learners in our classrooms During the 2017-2018 school year, we began the focus around a theory of change for the purpose of addressing the need for an increase in the number of students that are graduating from the BCHS prepared for college and careers. To that end, we refined our grading policy to address mastery in all subject areas. The staff at the BCHS has implemented a mastery-based learning curriculum in order to better personalize student learning experiences and give them the skills they need to master important subjects. The Bronx Community High School Students will be provided with the information and training they need to pass the New York State Certification Examinations in their field of choice. Students will then be provided with internship through our already existing LTW program. Restorative Justice For the 2018 -2019 school year, our campus schools will continue to engage in restorative justice in order to develop coherent practices that will afford our school community another lens to approach justice. The BCHS will focus on the needs of the victims, the offenders, and our community and will encourage our young adults to develop empathy for one another. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Our school is designed to provide over-aged, under-credited students who have a history of truancy with the opportunity to pursue a quality education, prepare for college and/or employment, engage in healthy personal relationships, and participate in the life of their communities. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 3  Strengths: Effective School Leadership: The school leadership worked collaboratively with the staff to develop a school improvement team that was tailored for the improvement of staff development and student achievement. The team was able to provide a blueprint for our school to achieve its goals and objectives as listed below: Teams of teachers were collaboratively on our instructional focus which required a paradigm shift from teacher centered direct instruction to a student centered classroom designed to encourage reading, critical thinking, collaborative conversations, and writing from sources. As a result, we have deepened the work around the process of writing across all content areas. We have observed an increase in student led discussions, peer to peer review and an increase in student reading and writing stamina. During the 2016-2017 school year, our school leadership introduced a dance program to the students as a means of broadening the scope around the arts program, giving students the arena to express their creative abilities. Our belief was that additional programs in the arts will promote a self-awareness of the students' natural abilities, increase their' self esteem, develop their strengths, foster excellent work ethic, and provide another vehicle for them to express their individuality, their inner feelings, and enable their leadership abilities. We were correct. The inception of a dance class has changed the trajectory of many of our students who were chronically absent or late for school, and those students who have fallen off track academically. Participating in the dance class, and given the opportunity to perform in cyclical culminating activities encouraged the students to attend school regularly and to be punctual to school daily . The number of students struggling with obesity has declined; their self esteem has increased, and there is a deeper connection to the school community. As a result, our dance class has evolved into a catalyst for student engagement and parent involvement as evidenced by an increase in the number of parents who have visited our school. Our school was the recipient of the Arts partner grant which afforded our students the opportunity to participate in a creative writing and spoken word class which was infused into our ELA classes. The students engaged in a culminating activity, and an anthology of the students work was published. Our visual arts classroom has been reconfigured to accommodate stations which gives the students the option to participate in various activities. The students developed an appreciation for visual arts and were able to produce pieces of art work that were entered in competitions and displayed in exhibitions. Needs: Our school would like to purchase costumes and acoustics for our dance classes, journals, novels and videos for our writing and spoken word classes and additional art supplies for our visual arts class. Our school would like to continue its humanities program which was discontinued this school year due to the lack of funding to replace our ESL teacher who provided an integral component of the humanities program. key areas of support for the 2018-2019 school year In order to ensure the successful delivery of our key areas of support, our staff has begun the work in the following areas: 4  Tiered Courses Our department teams are working together to redesign our tiered courses to ensure that our school is meeting our students where they are. Using our students’ current data, each department is working cohesively to sequence as well as develop units of study that are aligned with the Common Core, and deliberately designed to address mastery in learning. Cross Curricular Lesson Planning Teachers of different subjects will work closely with each other to create lesson plans with common themes. For example, the Visual Arts teacher will work alongside the Dance teacher to create paintings that reflect phrases of choreography done in Dance. Students in Dance, will improvise and think of movement using poetry done by students in English Language Arts. Using common themes helps students to further understand certain concepts in depth. Saturday Academy For the 2018-2019 school year, our school will continue to offer tutoring and extra help available to students on Saturdays. Teachers will be given an option to come in and work with our students who need further assistance on specific topics and subjects. Students will also get tutorials on skills needed to pass Regents examinations, help with homework and guidance in any other academic work necessary and additional credit bearing classes where necessary in order for them to be successful. House Intervention Support Teams We will continue to laser focus on student attendance to address the underlying causes of poor attendance as well and the strategies for student re-engagement. As a transfer school, we have been plagued with low student attendance which has a direct effect on student performance. In order to combat the problem, we decided to develop support teams that would engage all stakeholders. Family Group Classes We will further develop our family group classes to address the academic behaviors. Based on the knowledge and skills gained by our school community, our staff believes that our students’ success at our school is directly linked to the interconnectedness of all stakeholders (staff/students/parents), so we will continue to connect small groups of students to their teachers; to support them as they acclimate with our school culture; secondly, we will continue to design the groups to build a stronger bond between teachers and students in order for the students to have at least one adult in the building with whom they are comfortable with communicating; thirdly, we will continue to establish relationships with parents to support their son/daughter in increasing the number of days they attend school. Career Technical Education The Bronx Community High School (BCHS), after careful analysis of its data for the first 9 years of the school’s existence, has decided to add a career and technical education component to its academic repertoire. BCHS will continue two career and technology programs, nursing and information technology during the 2018 – 2019 school year. The target groups for these programs are students who are themselves parents, students who are about to become parents, students who stated that they are not ready to go to college because of undetermined reasons, and students who have demonstrated a high interest in acquiring a vocational skill and a New York State Certification in the relevant field. 5  Priority Needs Our school requires improvement in the number of students who are prepared to excel on Regents examinations and achieve graduation with the skills necessary for college and career. 6  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X377 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 175 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient N/A N/A 4 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 21 22 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 80.0% % Attendance Rate 78.9% % Reduced Lunch 6.3% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.6% 60.6% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.6% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7% 7% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 55% 27% 10.4% 0.0% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YES N/A N/A NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 12 12 62.0% 0.0% 20.6% 35.4% 2.9% 0.6% 2 40% 5.8 N/A N/A 57% 33% 52.3% 1% N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The Bronx Community High School prides itself in its ability to develop and build community while admitting students on a rolling admission basis. At the BCHS, we continue to emphasize leadership, collaboration and personalization. During the years of 2015-2018, we were able to accomplish our goal around mastery based learning focus around a theory of change for the purpose of addressing the need for an increase in the number of students that are graduating from the BCHS prepared for college and careers. We have experienced an increase of credit accumulation by 4.1% with students who have entered this school with 11-22 credits and an increase by 8.6% with students who have entered this school with 22-33 credits. The house model has enabled our school community to develop systems and structures that encourages the development of our students' abilities to work collaboratively with their peers, develop leadership skills and perseverance as evidenced in the climate and culture of our school. Our four house leaders are responsible for the overall progress of his/her individual house; therefore, in order to ensure that our staff is accurately gauging the students’ progress towards graduation, our house supervisors will continue to monitor the students’ academic and social development throughout the trimesters to ensure that our students remain on track for graduation. During the 2018-2019 school year, our staff will laser focus on students' ability to reading comprehension, discussion and writing from sources; we will continue to sequence and redesign our tiered courses to provide a rigorous and engaging curriculum that will develop positive habits of the mind within our students. We will continue to enroll our students in small classes where they receive academic intervention tailored to meet their needs. We will continue to embed the academic behaviors within our houses in order to enrich and support our students academic and social development. We will continue to monitor our students’ progress as reflected in the four domains of the College and Career Readiness Benchmarks:  Common Core Learning Standards  Academic & Personal Behaviors  Academic Programming  College and Career Access 8  We will continue to utilize the “School Barometer Tool” (rubrics that benchmark the aforementioned domains) as we were better equipped to detect the early warning signs and quickly make informed decisions. To that end, each house team attached the College and Career Readiness Benchmarks to the students’ bi-weekly progress report. The house teams conference with students to inform them of their progress and the necessary steps that must be adhered to. Students who have not shown progress by the end of the first cycle will be scheduled for Student-Teacher-Advocate Counselor meetings (STAC) to determine the necessary interventions to support and re-engage them in the educational process. School’s challenges: Using all of the above strategies, we will continue to seek ways in which we can combat the issue of poor attendance, the most challenging component of work. It is a fact that if students attend school regularly, they have the opportunity to make progress; on the other hand, it is extremely difficult for students to be successful when they are chronically absent. Our school’s key areas of support for the 2018-2019 school year are the following: Improvement in our students’ daily attendance rate. Developing our students ability to investigate, reason, read, writing, problem solve and discuss collaboratively Improve our students’ passing rate on all Regents Examination Increase our students ‘credit accumulation rate. Enable students with the skills necessary for college and career Increase the number of students graduating from our 6 year cohort Tiered Courses Our department teams are working together to redesign our tiered courses to ensure that our school is meeting our students where they are. House Intervention Support Teams We will continue to laser focus on student attendance to address the underlying causes of poor attendance as well and the strategies for student re-engagement. As a transfer school, we have been plagued with low student attendance which has a direct effect on student performance. In order to combat the problem, we decided to develop support teams that would engage all stakeholders. Our House intervention teams will continue to group students into two teams based on their needs. One of the intervention teams will continue to works directly with truants and our most at risk students to re-engage them in the educational process. To recognize the success of our students who 9  attend school regularly and are on track for graduation, the other intervention team will continue to provide targeted support for these students. Each intervention team will continue to provide one-on-one and group support for the students. Each student is given an initial visit with the intervention team to discuss the student’s progress and next steps for success. The student is then placed on a learning plan that is designed to address his/her individual needs. The plan must be signed by the students and their parents and adhered to. Students also meet in peer-groups to discuss their progress and share ideas. The students met with their intervention teams on a bi-weekly basis to discuss their progress and the necessary steps that must be adhered to by all students. In order to deepen the work and maintain an enduring structure for our students to thrive, our school community implemented a variety of tiered intervention services which will give students the following options: Cross Curricular Lesson Planning Teachers of different subjects will work closely with each other to create lesson plans with common themes. For example, the Visual Arts teacher will work alongside the Dance teacher to create paintings that reflect phrases of choreography done in Dance. Students in Dance, will improvise and think of movement using poetry done by students in English Language Arts. Using common themes helps students to further understand certain concepts in depth. Saturday Academy For the 2018-2019 school year, there will be tutoring and extra help available to students on Saturdays. Teachers will be given an option to come in and work with our students who need further assistance on specific topics and subjects. Students will also get tutorials on skills needed to pass Regents examinations, help with homework and guidance in any other academic work necessary for them to be successful. Family Group Classes We will further develop our family group classes to address the academic behaviors. Based on the knowledge and skills gained by our school community, our staff believes that our students’ success at our school is directly linked to the interconnectedness of all stakeholders (staff/students/parents), so we will continue to connect small groups of students to their teachers; to support them as they acclimate with our school culture; secondly, we will continue to design the groups to build a stronger bond between teachers and students in order for the students to have at least one adult in the building with whom they are comfortable with communicating; thirdly, we will continue to establish relationships with parents to support their son/daughter in increasing the number of days they attend school. The family group structure has become an integral component of our youth development program as it has promoted social growth through the bonding of students in their family groups. Family Group has also engendered academic success. As part of the academic support, students have the opportunity to switch family groups based on their needs around academic or social skills development; for example, if a student needs regent’s preparation, they can go to that family group teacher in the respective content area for assistance.Our school seeks to improve Teacher' proficiency and student achievement in the core academic areas in order to increase college and career readiness for all students; thereby, closing the achievement for students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and students who enter high school at a low performance level. 0  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school's data will reflect an increase in our 6th year cohort graduation rate from 53.7% - 59% as measured in an increase in our cohort graduation rate and evidenced in the School Quality Guide. 1 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept, 2018- June, 2019 School Leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Our school's goal for the 2018-2019 school year is to continue to engage our students so that they can come to school on a regular basis, hence getting the appropriate preparation they need to succeed in passing classes, passing Regents and gradating on time. With a good foundation, students can proceed to college and aspire to greatness. Our instructional focus, will require students to engage with text, think critically, contribute to the intellectual, collaborative conversations, and write effectively from sources. Our staff will engage with rubrics that will enable them to develop rigorous curriculum maps, unit and lesson plans that reflect coherence, course clarity and rigor within the content areas. In order to build upon our teachers' ability to lead the work, our teachers will continue to receive professional development across all content areas form our consultants, school leaders and lead teachers. Teachers will do their utmost in providing engaging lessons and instruction so that students have the drive to come to school and want to be in the classroom. The curriculum will be created around the idea of relevance and interest, and how material being taught connects with the outside world. In addition to the mandated services received by our students with disabilities, our English Language Learners, and other high-need students, we will continue to push in our ICT, SETSS and ENL teacher to provide the necessary supports in the content areas. Teachers will participate in the ICT lab site program Teachers Sept, 2018 -June, 2019 School Leaders 2 collaborating with other schools working with other ICT teachers and students. The students will continue to receive additional support before and after school and Saturday Academy. The students will continue to participate in the Achieve 3000 and Think Cerca program. Our staff will develop a staff, parent, partnership program to encourage parent engagement. We will continue to invite parent to our parent room that is available to them every Friday from 12:00 p.m. – 2:20 p.m. Parent surveys will be provided to assess our parents interest and to respond to their questions, comments and concerns. Trainings will be provided for parents focused on the Common Core Learning Standards and Skedula system. All stakeholders (School staff, parents, students and administrators) will work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, we will be involved in fostering a respectful environment. Parents Sept, 2018- June, 2019 School Leaders Entire School Sept, 2018-June, 2019 Comm-unity School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will host student-parent assemblies and academic interventions which will help to support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and the Common Core. During these meetings, parents will be educated on what Common Core is and how every subject taught is aligned with Common Core. Once parents know the elements of Common Core, they will comprehend how Rigorous Instruction is implemented in lesson delivery and the work ethic their children should have. Parents can help their children at home with their work knowing what the outcomes of their children should be. Ruth Wise is the key personnel for this implementation and oversight. These meetings will occur once every benchmark. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve our annual goal, we will need additional support in the following areas:  Teacher per-session to provide after school and Saturday Academy tutoring/credit accumulation/recovery and other extra-curricular activities.  Teacher per-session and per-diem will be offered to teachers attending professional developing as well as teachers providing coverage for teachers attending professional development.  Supervisor per-session for all after school and Saturday Academy programs. 3   Professional Development will be provided by the school leaders and staff.  in order for our school to provide adequate services and the necessary supports for our teaching and learning initiatives, our students must be provided additional funding for supplies and technology such as laptops, calculators and smartboards to support our teaching and learning initiatives. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E X 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school identifies February 15, 2019 as our mid-point benchmark that will indicate the school’s progress toward meeting our goal of increasing our 6th year graduation cohort rate from 54% - 67%. We will compare our data using information provided in our New Visions Sorter and our January Regents Examination to track and guide our work as we focus on continuous improvement of our 6th year graduation cohort rate. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) New Visions Sorter/DOE metrics Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths The BCHS thrives in creating an environment comfortable and safe enough for our students so that they feel like their school is a home. Having a nurturing, but realistic place for students to be in contributes to their socio-economic and emotional development. In this home within a school, the house structure has exceeded our expectations and has moved our students in a way that drives them to accomplish their goals and graduate with pride. Each teacher has a caseload of students that he/she is responsible for which builds student-teacher rapport and helps students students to feel like they are being reached as individuals, catering to their needs. This type of mentorship builds loving relationships that propel students to success. Leadership: Our staff members have elevated themselves in their roles and have taken on new and challenging tasks. Our COSA has become the leader of the newly created Sophomore House and has also become a dean. We seek to develop a deeper understanding and shared commitment of staff and student leadership within our school community. To that end, we will revisit our core values and refine our goals for staff student leadership. Collaboration: Collaboration will continue to be the cornerstone of our work at the Bronx Community High School. This school year, our staff will laser focus on supporting each other through mentoring, peer to peer review, professional development, and teacher team leadership. Personalization: The Bronx Community High School continues to prioritize the importance of teachers setting goals for themselves, their students and their departments. The school leadership continues to meet with teachers to discuss their goals and their progress. We provided teachers with individualized professional development plan tailored to accommodate their needs, and personalized Student Achievement Plans for each student designed to personalize their learning. Needs 5  Our school seeks to focus on student leadership as we seek to enhance academic abilities. Although distributive leadership has been implemented at our school, we seek to refine the process to engender the deliberate involvement of our students. Our school was able to broaden its scope around the arts program, giving students the arena to express their creative abilities. Our belief was that additional programs in the arts will promote a self-awareness of the students' natural abilities, increase their' self esteem, develop their strengths, foster excellent work ethic, and provide another vehicle for them to express their individuality, their inner feelings, and enable their leadership abilities. We were correct. The inception of a dance class have changed the trajectory of many of our students who were chronically absent or late for school, and those students who have fallen off track academically. Participating in the dance class, and given the opportunity to perform in cyclical culminating activities encouraged the students to attend school regularly and to be punctual to school daily . The number of students struggling with obesity has declined; their self esteem has increased, and there is a deeper connection to the school community. As a result, our dance class has evolved into a catalyst for student engagement and parent involvement as evidenced by an increase in the number of parents who have visited our school. The dance teacher and the visual arts teacher will begin collaboration on the various arts projects which will include work around college and career access for all. For the past two years, our school year,our school was the recipient of a Arts partner grant which afforded our students the opportunity to participate in a creative writing and spoken word class which was infused into our ELA classes. The students engaged in a culminating activity, and an anthology of the students work was published. Our visual arts teacher has created additional stations in the classroom through which, the students are given the option to participate in various activities. The students developed an appreciation for visual arts and were able to produce pieces of art work that were entered in competitions and displayed in exhibitions. The teacher seeks to add more stations to increase students interest and develop their skills around the various stations. This school year, our school would like to purchase costumes and acoustics for our dance classes, journals, novels and videos for our writing and spoken word classes, and additional art supplies for our visual arts class. Priority Needs The Bronx Community High School seeks to further develop its teacher team work around coherent practices that will positively impact the climate and culture of our school as it relates to our students' leadership development and their proficiency in the arts and the core academic subjects which we believe will positively impact our students' motivation to attend school daily. 6  Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our data will reflect an increase in our average Regents completion rate from 63% - 65% in ELA and 59% - 61% in Algebra as measured in our college readiness index and evidenced in our School Quality Guide. 7 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept, 2018 School Leaders June, 2019 Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During the 2018-2019 school year, keen attention will be given to students' academic and personal behaviors. Everyone will work together in bettering student outcomes, in preparation for post-high school careers and a successful future. Bronx Community will continue to build upon an environment that is respectful and nurturing. Our College and Career for All Inquiry team will reach out to parents in order to develop a team that will be invested and involved with the culture and climate of the school. Our goal is to see continuous improvement in student attendance and to heighten their work ethic and leadership. The achievement gap will be closed for students with disabilities, English as a New Language (ENL) and students who entered high school at a low performance level in English and Mathematics as reflected in their ELN and Math scores. Students Sept, 2018 School Leaders June, 2019 Our students with disabilities will receive necessary supports mandated in their IEPs. This school year, our special education teachers will push in classrooms and assist students as well as work with students with disabilities individually. 8  In order to enhance the reading comprehension skills of our Students with disabilities and our ENL students we will continue to afford them the Achieve-3000 program. Students with disabilities, ENL, students and other high-needs students are given access to the general education curriculum; they participate in all programs that are offered at our school, they are included in all of our school events and extracurricular activities which include, but not limited to PM School and Saturday Academy. We will continue to invite parent to become an integral part of our school community. We will reach out to them through telephone and mail as well as back packing of our students. School leaders will continue to engage our teachers in professional development that is geared towards our school-wide instructional focus which requires our students to engage in Productive Struggle that will enable them to build their stamina for reading, writing and thinking through difficult tasks as well the ability across all content areas. Where necessary, other teachers are receiving support based on our instructional focus as well as coaching to address their individual needs. The school leaders will continue to provide professional development and cycles of coaching for all staff members. The teachers will continue to receive frequent, low-inference observations that are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching in order to build a shared understanding of effective teaching. The principal will provide professional development and individual coaching based on the identified needs of individual and groups of teachers. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Sept, 2018 School Leaders Entire School Community June, 2019 Sept, 2018 School Leaders June, 2019 How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will continue to host student-parent assemblies regarding the underlying factors that impact student achievement. During these meetings, parents will be educated on what a supportive environment looks like and 9  aspects of this that will help students succeed. Once parents are aware of what a supportive environment is, they can create this at home for their children, promoting a healthy journey or learning. Parents will be encouraged to do further research on the underlying causes that impact their children as individuals because everyone learns differently. Ruth Wise is the key personnel for this implementation and oversight. These meetings will occur once every benchmark. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve our annual goal, we will need additional support in the following areas:` 1. Teacher per-session to provide after school and Saturday Academy tutoring and other extra-curricular activities. 2. Teacher per-session and per diem will be offered to teachers attending professional developing as well as teachers providing coverage for teachers attending professional development. Supervisor per-session for all after school and Saturday Academy programs 3. Professional Development will be provided by the school leaders and staff as well as staff developers. 4. Additional supplies to support the school's initiative. 5. Additional Funds for Basic emergency supplies 6. Additional funds allocated to increase parent engagement 7. Our school requires an additional special education teacher to support our rapidly growing ICT program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school identifies February 15, 2019 as our mid-point benchmark when we will capture our data from the New Visions Sorter and ATS to indicate the school’s progress toward meeting our attendance goal from 62.0% to 65.0%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. The New Visions Sorter which aggregates the data and the Student daily attendance as reflected in ATS which provides our students daily attendance rates. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Teacher Feedback through Cycles of Coaching At the Bronx Community High School, the school leaders have continued the practice of conducting frequent, low-inference observations that are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching to concretize a shared understanding of effective teaching. The principal continues to ensure that professional development and individual coaching are provided for all teachers. The principal continues to provide professional development based on the identified needs of individual and groups of teachers; thus, our teachers receive instructional support based on identified needs. Our teachers engage in professional development that is geared towards our school-wide writing initiative and instructional focus. Where necessary, other teachers receive support based on their content area as well as coaching to address their individual needs. Teachers observe collegues on a regular basis and give feedback based on the Danielson Framework. Feedback is implemented to ensure that teacher instruction improves and progresses. The principal and assistant principal have continued the process of providing cycles of coaching for the teachers. After the teachers are observed, the principal and assistant principal meet with each teacher to deliver timely critique and observation reports that capture the strengths and challenges of teacher practice and its impact on student learning, clearly integrating the next steps into the feedback cycle. Where necessary, the principal and assistant principal provide cycles of coaching for the teachers after each observation. In order to ensure that the observation and feedback process are yielding improvements in teaching and learning, the principal Implemented a system to track teacher feedback, monitor growth over time, and identify needs. With the assistance of reDesign a literacy program, the principal has constructed an individualized professional development plan for each teacher. Where necessary, our consultants are providing individualized coaching to strengthen their own instructional practice as well as our instructional focus. The intention is deliberate; our quest is to develop a rich cadre of teachers, by highlighting strong pedagogy that supports the relationship among curricula and student tasks through actionable feedback and coaching, and creating model classrooms that would serve as lab sites for all staff. Collaboration: The Bronx Community High School (BCHS) has the opportunity to redesign a program that affords opportunities for our school community. The school values effective leadership, collaboration and personalization as a result the focus 2  for the upcoming school year, 2018-2019 will be on goal setting and continued collaboration of teacher teams. During the 2018-2019 school years our staff worked collaboratively to develop and strengthen our school’s program in the areas of curriculum, as well as climate and culture. Through collaboration teacher teams continue to support one another because teachers were able to continue the work started in one classroom to the next. Collaboration of teacher teams will be more focused with an interdisciplinary push to have for example the English and social studies department working together. As a result we have developed a cadre of leaders who have honed the skills necessary for instructional as well as youth development leadership within our school community. Needs Additional training to further develop and strengthen the impact on teacher proficiency and student achievement In order to achieve our annual goal, we will need additional support in the following areas: 1. Teacher per-session to provide after school and Saturday Academy tutoring and other extra-curricular activities. 2. Teacher per-session and per-diem will be offered to teachers attending professional developing as well as teachers providing coverage for teachers attending professional development. 3. Supervisor per-session for all after school and Saturday Academy programs 4. Additional support will be needed to extend our support for our two consultants who are supporting our work in mathematics and overall school improvement support. Priority Needs: Our school seeks to increase our average Regents completion rate and the number of credits accumulated by our students annually. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school's data will reflect an increase in our students' attendance rate from 62.0% - 65% as measured in the increase in our students’ credit accumulation rate and evidenced in our School Quality Guide. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? During the 2016 - 2017 school year, the work of our teacher teams will be tantamount to the development of our professional development plan as well as the innovation in our courses. Teachers Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders Our annual goal will be achieved based on the preparation of our highly qualified teachers who will engage our students in a rich and rigorous instructional program to support their college and career readiness. Our school will seek to provide additional funding for professional development designed to support our teachers' instructional practice. We will continue to close the achievement gap for students with disabilities, ENL, and students who enter high school at a low performance level as evidenced by a 2% increase in their graduation rate from the current 50.0% to 52%. as currently reflected in our school’s DOE student-level data. During the 2016 - 2017 school year, our school will participate as a partner in the Lab Site program which will capitalize and develop our work to continue to provide our students with disabilities, ENL, and other high-needs students the additional support during the school day. Our teachers will also concentrate on developing student transitional plans that target students learning needs, their goals and objectives. Teachers will provide additional support for our Students Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders 4 students during Saturday Academy as well as our after school programs. We will continue to provide tutoring for our students with disabilities, our English Language Learners and other high-needs students will continue to receive additional support in our PM School and Saturday Academy. Our school has provided funding to afford our students the opportunity to receive Basic emergency supplies as well as funding to increase our parent engagement. Aggressive parent outreach will continue. We will continue to invite parent to our parent room that is available to them every Friday from 1:00 p.m. – 2:20 p.m. Across the school community, we will be involved in fostering a respectful environment. All stakeholders (school staff, parents, students and administrators) will work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for college and career. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Parents Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders Entire School Community Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will host student-parent assemblies about Collaborative Teachers and Strategies to promote teacher-parent collaborations, so that parents can support their children at home. BCHS will have activities that encourage collaboration and community building. There will be role playing, which will allow teachers, parents and students to feel how it will be like to be in reversed places. Parents, teachers and students will work in groups to fully experience what collaborative learning is. Parents will be educated on the importance of compromise and meeting others halfway so that there can be successful relationships built. Students can work well at home if their parents foster a well rounded open line of communication, promoting collaboration. Ruth Wise is the key personnel for this implementation and oversight. These meetings will occur once every benchmark. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 5  BCHS seeks to afford our students additional academic intervention support as well as extra-curricular activities; thus, our school hires highly qualified teachers to provide a rich and rigorous instructional program to support the varied needs of our students. Our teachers will provide additional support for our students during Saturday Academy as well as after school. Our school is currently receiving cycles of professional development from our Affinity Group. Our school will seek to provide additional funding for professional development designed to support our teacher’s instructional practice. Our school provides Basic emergency supplies for our students. funding to increase our parent engagement is provided, as well as funding for our school Leadership Team (SLT) to support our school’s initiative around our CEP goals as well as a laser focus on parent engagement.In order to achieve our annual goal, we will need additional support in the following areas: 1. Teacher per-session to provide after school and Saturday Academy tutoring and other extra-curricular activities. 2. Teacher per-session and per diem will be offered to teachers attending professional developing as well as teachers providing coverage for teachers attending professional development. 3. Supervisor per-session for all after school and Saturday Academy programs 4. Professional Development and school improvement support from our school leaders and our consultants. 5. Additional supplies to support the school's initiative. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant X Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school identifies February 15, 2019 as our mid-point benchmark that will indicate the school’s progress toward meeting our goal. We will compare our data using information provided in the New Visions Sorter which reveal real-time data for our school and our daily ATS reports. We also utilize the data revealed in the NYCDOE's metric values to reflect a 5.0% increase in our average Regents completion rate from 22.6% - 27.6% and our credit accumulation rate for students earning 11-22 credits from 8.0% - 13.0%. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents Data/ Scholarship Report/New Visions Sorter/ATS/School Quality Guide Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 6  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Instructional Leadership During the 2018-2019 school year, our school leadership focused around teacher development and student proficiency in the content area. As a result, we have experienced an increase in the number of students achieving Regents scores and increasing their accumulation rate. The school continues to focus its work around teacher proficiency and student achievement to ensure that the Bronx Community High School develops effectively as a PROSE school, our staff has successfully experienced the gradual release of responsibility to our students using the research based Workshop Model for lesson delivery. The teachers created curriculum maps that were reflective of higher order thinking and aligned to the school’s core beliefs, and designed curricular which integrated Webbs Depth of Knowledge curriculum maps that were aligned to the CCLS standards and their lesson plans aligned to the Danielson Framework for Effective Teaching. The school leaders conducted frequent, low-inference observations that are aligned to the Danielson Framework for Teaching to build a shared understanding of effective teaching. The principal provided professional development and individual coaching for all teachers. The principal also demonstrated to the teachers that professional development decisions are based on the identified needs of individual and groups of teachers; therefore, our teachers are receiving instructional support based on identified needs. Our teacher leaders received instructional support from one of our New Visions Talent Coaches. They team engaged in professional development that is geared towards our school-wide instructional focus. Where necessary, other teachers received support based on their instructional focus as well as coaching to address their individual needs. The school leaders developed time in the schedule to meet with each teacher to deliver timely feedback and observation reports that capture the strengths and challenges of teacher practice and its impact on student learning and clearly integrates the next steps into the feedback cycle. In order to ensure that the observation and feedback process were yielding improvements in teaching and learning, the principal provided actionable feedback to the teachers, monitored growth over time, and identified needs. With the assistance of the literacy consultant, the principal provided individualized professional development plan for each teacher. Teachers received cycles of coaching after each observation to strengthen their pedagogy. Where necessary, our literacy consultant provided individualized coaching around our instructional focus as well as additional support to strengthen the teachers’ own instructional practice. The intention was deliberate; our quest to develop an effective cadre of teachers, by highlighting strong pedagogy that supports the relationship among curricula and student tasks through actionable feedback and coaching, and creating model classrooms that would serve as lab sites for all staff was realized, and continues to be a work in progress. Needs 7  BCHS believes that leadership should be democratic hence we continue to foster an environment of distributive leadership in this school. Some of the areas include department heads, inquiry team leaders, deans and house leaders. In this way, our school is able to have shared responsibility, transparency and coherence in our program. Teachers act with professionalism and are able to be that mentor that supports and influence our students to do well. Our school seeks to capitalize on the work that is in progress; therefore, the school requires additional support for professional development and additional training to capitalize on the work we have engaged around teacher team development Priority Needs Our school seeks to increase the number of students achieving college and career readiness for all students; thereby, closing the achievement for students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and students who enter high school at a low performance level. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will increase our peer group high school college readiness index to reflect a 5% increase from 4.9% - 9.9% as measured by the number of students enrolled in colleges and universities and evidenced in our DOE student level data and the School Quality Guide. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). During our weekly team meetings our looks at data, utilizes student data to gauge and refine assessments; then, makes recommendations. The teachers will continue to receive ongoing professional development during our weekly professional development sessions as well as their individual coaching sessions. We will also continue to provide cycles of coaching for all staff members. Students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-needs students will receive additional support in their ICT, ENL, Mathematics as well as the students designated ENL classrooms. The students will also receive additional academic support during our PM School and Saturday Academy. Our campus has renovated one of the rooms on the first floor to accommodate a parent room. The room is located on the first floor directly across from our main lobby; this location is convenient to our parents; it allows easy access for parent meetings and other activities as they visit our campus. The Bronx Community High School staff will continue our parents Aggressive parent outreach will continue. We will continue to invite parent to come in and visit our school, attend PTA and SLT and participate in our school activities. All stakeholders (School staff, parents, students and administrators) will work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, we will be involved in fostering a respectful environment. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders Students Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders Parents Sept, 2018 June, 2019 Schools Leaders Entire School Community Sept, 2018 June, 2019 School Leaders How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Our school will continue to host student-parent assemblies about Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home. BCHS will have hands-on workshops that will involve parents' input on what they believe Effective School Leadership is, and administration will 9  hone these ideas in the right direction. Our assistant principal and our deans will continue to lead seminars on successful ways they have run the school in the past, and how some of these methods can be implemented in routines at home. Designated members will show through role playing and further demonstration how parents can take on their duty as a leader of the home and assist their children with school work. Affirmative action in friendly delivery, which promotes student voice is what BCHS abides by and what has led to an Effective School Leadership environment. Ruth Wise is the key personnel for this implementation and oversight. These meetings will occur once every benchmark. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. In order to achieve this annual goal, our highly qualified teachers will engage our students in a rich and rigorous instructional program to support the Common Core Learning Standards as well as provide social skills development to address the varied needs of our students. In order to achieve our annual goal, we will need additional support in the following areas: Teacher per-session to provide after school and Saturday Academy tutoring and other extra-curricular activities. Teacher per-session and per-diem will be offered to teachers attending professional developing as well as teachers providing coverage for teachers attending professional development. Supervisor per-session for all after school and Saturday Academy programs Support staff members to provide additional support in our parent outreach efforts Professional Development will be provided by the school leaders and staff as well as staff developers. Additional supplies to support the school's initiative. Parent engagement outreach Basic emergency supplies Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 0  Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school identifies February 15, 2019 as our mid-point benchmark that will indicate the school’s progress toward meeting our % increase in our college and career metric goal from 4.9% to 9.9% in the number of students attending college as evidenced in the School Quality Guide. We will compare our data using information provided in the New Visions Sorter which reveal real-time data for our school and our daily ATS reports. We also utilize the data revealed in the NYCDOE's metric values to reflect upon our data. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Regents Data/Scholarship Report/New Visions Sorter/DOE student level data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths CBO/Community partners Partnership The critical partnership between the community based organizations (CBO), the community partners and our school was paramount to the success of our students. By reviewing the data for our transfer high school, we were made aware of the need for effective practices and a rich youth development component, to ensure that our students receive a meaningful high school experience that would propel them towards graduation and college and career. Our school has been working with our partners to afford our students opportunities. To that end, the BCHS has gained traction in college and career and as well youth development programs such as mentoring, college tours to name a few of the opportunities that were provided for our students. In order to deepen the work around strong family and community ties, the Bronx Community High School has continued to forge robust partnership with community based organizations that have displayed fidelity in the work around youth development in which attendance intervention and dropout prevention as well as college and career awareness and readiness. The Monroe College Jump Start Program The Monroe College is designed for high school juniors and seniors to afford students the opportunity to enroll in an early college program. Our students will participate in the Monroe College Jumpstart program which affords our students to participate in courses that are both interesting and challenging. The students will engage in classes that are held on the campus affording them the exposure of a campus experience and the relevance of associate, bachelors and masters degree programs as well as flexible class schedules, internships and training programs Our partnership with the Monroe College has allowed our students several opportunities to visit the campus and engage in workshops. To further equip our students with college readiness skills, the principal of the Bronx Community High School has forged a partnership with the Monroe College to provide the Monroe College Jump Start Program, an early college experience for the students on the Adlai Stevenson Educational Campus. The Generation Citizens Program: The Bronx Community High School will offer the Generation Citizen's action civics curriculum which provides work that is of both Democracy Coach-led and teacher-led models. The curriculum is action-based, aligned to state standards, and academically rigorous. The program provides an in class course which affords the students the opportunity to choose an issue they care about, develop a focused, strategic plan to address the issue, take real action, and then reflect on their successes, challenges, and plans moving forward. 2  Needs: Strong Family Community Ties The Bronx Community will continue to capitalize on the successes that we have gained around parental involvement; however, our staff seeks to develop a plan that is further inclusive of our families’ involvement in our school community. To that end, we will continue our commitment BCHS has a strong parent outreach program, but we need to ensure that this is continued on a higher scale for the 2018-2019 school year. BCHS need to re purpose its efforts to to working in conjunction with our parents, our School Leadership Team (SLT), and our community based organization in order to provide a number of initiatives to ensure services are targeted to meet the needs of students as well as being person centered with specific interventions designed for each student or group of students. our staff will continue to promote a school community that is inclusive of all stake-holders and reflective of a rich parent engagement program that actively engages families in their son’s/daughter’s education as well as the operations and activities of the Bronx Community HS, and also to address concerns in a timely fashion. Service Learning: The school will continue its involvement in community activities such as feeding the homeless, soup kitchens and multiple blood drives. Partnering with New York City Mission Society, BCHS will institute an ‘adopt a parent outreach’ endeavor with the general purpose of promoting parent engagement. One thing that will be implemented as a way to strengthen parent involvement is an award ceremony for parents for the 2017-2018 school year. This school year, our campus has designated a parent room, which is a welcome area for our parents when visiting our school. Priority Needs To increase parent engagement Our school is in need of funding for support staff to assist our school with the parent outreach efforts. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, our school will increase our parent outreach from 99.0% to 100% as measured by the number of parents participating in our school community activities and evidenced in the Framework for Great Schools. 3 Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers Sept 2018 June 2019 School Leaders Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The Instructional Team Leaders will continue to meet with the school leaders to discuss findings from each team meetings and together with the administration informed decisions are being made. The entire staff meets once per week for professional development designed to address and develop the capacity of the staff and to achieve coherency of instructional practices. This school year, our team has focused in the following areas:  School leaders actively monitor classroom instruction via the Danielson Framework for Teacher Practice and provide actionable feedback to teachers.  Our school community has implemented the shifts in ELA Literacy and Mathematics, and our curriculum is aligned to the Common Core State Standards.  Our teachers actively engage with the Danielson Framework for instructional practices in order to develop their instructional practice.  We have revised our tiered program for our classes to accommodate the varied readiness of our students; for example, based on our Regents data, our school community needed to shift our practice in the way in which we tiered all classes. All content area teachers are now planning integrated curricula in order to embed school-wide literacy practices in support of the shifts in ELA Literacy and Mathematics  The tri-state rubric is used to ensure alignment of our curriculum. We will continue to Collaboratively refocus and redesign our offering of elective classes which were designed to support the core academic classes in order to provide students the additional support and enrichment needed to succeed in their core academic classes. As a result, all classrooms provide coherent strategies that enable the student to scaffold for information which is then capitalized upon in other classes where they have been able to transfer their skills, and inter-connect classroom instruction. 4  Students who have not passed the Regents examinations or have not achieved the CUNY metrics are placed in one of the elective classes designed for additional support. In order to develop the most effective pedagogical practices, teachers actively design department, and personal goals based on the Common Core Learning Standards and Danielson Framework for Teaching Practices. The school provides rigorous and coherent curricula that are aligned to the Common Core Learning Standards and/or content area and are accessible to a variety of learners in all subjects. The school leaders will continue to support our teacher leaders. The school leaders will meet with the administration to discuss findings from each team meetings and together with the administration informed decisions are being made. The entire staff meets once per week for professional development designed to address and develop the capacity of the staff and to achieve coherency of instructional practices. This school year, our team has focused in the following areas:  School leaders actively monitor classroom instruction via the Danielson Framework for Teacher Practice andprovide actionable feedback to teachers.  Our school community has implemented the shifts in ELA Literacy and Mathematics, and our curriculum is aligned to the Common Core State Standards.  Our teachers actively engage with the Danielson Framework for instructional practices in order to develop their instructional practice.  We have revised our tiered program for our classes to accommodate the varied readiness of our students; for example, based on our Regents data, our school community needed to shift our practice in the way in which we tiered all classes. All content area teachers are now planning integrated curricula in order to embed school-wide literacy practices in support of the shifts in ELA Literacy and Mathematics  The Tri-State rubric is used to ensure alignment of our curriculum. Collaboratively, the school leaders will continue to work with the teachers to continue the work focused on a rich and coherent school program. Our school carefully refocused and redesigned Students Sept 2018 June 2019 School Leaders 5  our offering of elective classes designed to support each core academic class to provide students the additional support and enrichment needed to succeed in their core academic classes. As a result, all classrooms will continue to provide coherent strategies that enable the student to scaffold for information which is then capitalized upon in other classes where they have been able to transfer their skills, and inter-connect classroom instruction. Students who have not passed the Regents examinations or have not achieved the CUNY metrics are placed in one of the elective classes for additional support. Our House teams have been instrumental in developing student achievement plans which helps our school to gauge and refine our students' data as we prepare them for transition from high school and beyond. House teams will continue to meet weekly to discuss our students' academic and social skills development; at the end of each benchmark, the team meets to discuss students progress. The end of each cycle indicates the school’s progress toward meeting our goal. We will continue to use the following data sources to measure our students’ progress:  Benchmark assessments  Mock Regents Examinations  Regents Examination  Credit accumulation  Mastery of Core academic classes  College and Career Prep Course Our students with disabilities and our ELL population will continue to receive their mandated services as well as additional tutoring after school and during Saturday Academy. Counseling support will also be provided accordingly. Students who are performing below the expectations as outlined in our mastery based grading policy, will be scheduled for an intervention meeting with their House team where they will be given the opportunity to work with the team in developing an 6 intervention plan that is designed to change the current trajectory. During our PTA and SLT meetings, we will provide workshops and trainings tailored to meet the needs of our parents, and we will also work with the parents to develop strategies that will encourage parent participation and increase parental involvement. Proactive parent outreach will be continued. All stakeholders (School staff, parents, students and administrators) will work toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, we will be involved in fostering a respectful environment. Parents Sept 2018 School Leaders June 2019 Entire School Community Sept 2018 June 2019 School Leaders 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. New York City Missions Society, 21st Century and Community Change Inc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We have included in our budget the following funds: Title 1 Parent Involvement - $500.00 Parent Involvement funds for our parent coordinator - $1,232.00 Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy C4E X X Title I SWP 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Our school identifies February 15, 2019 as our mid-point benchmark that will indicate the school’s progress toward meeting our goal. We will compare the previous school year’s progress and our current school year to measure our students’ progress. We will compare our data using information provided in the Framework for Great Schools which currently reflects a 87% outreach to parents. We will increase the percentage by 3.0% to reflect a 90% increase in the parent outreach category. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. 7  We will measure our progress via parent participation in the SLT/PTA/family night/Open-School Day/Night. The data reflected in the Framework for Great Schools will also guide our procedures for increasing parent outreach. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group and one-to-one, tutoring During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Tutoring in ELA and the Achieve 3000 Program, Think CERCA writing across allcontent areas Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Academic Intervention (AIS) services are determined based on the following: 1. classroom assessments and observations 2. Students most recent progress on Regents examinations 3. Data from students' IEPs 4. Data revealing the levels of our ENL students Based on the school's data that is being reflected in the New Visions Data Sorter, the New York City Department of 9 Tutoring in Mathematics Small group and one-to-one, tutoring During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy Mathematics Education Data Extractor and classroom data, we have included additional supports for our students with disabilities, ENL students, and other high-need students. The studentswill receive additional support in our PM School and Saturday Academy. Academic Intervention (AIS) services are determined based on the following: 1. classroom assessments and observations 2. Students most recent progress on Regents examinations 3. Data from students' IEPs 4. Data revealing the levels of our ENL students Based on the school's data that is being reflected in the New Visions Data Sorter, the New York City Department of Education Data 0 Tutoring in Science Small group and one-to-one, tutoring During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy Science Extractor and classroom data, we have included additional supports for our students with disabilities, ENL students, and other high-need students. The studentswill receive additional support in our PM School and Saturday Academy. Academic Intervention (AIS) services are determined based on the following: 1. classroom assessments and observations 2. Students most recent progress on Regents examinations 3. Data from students' IEPs 4. Data revealing the levels of our ENL students Based on the school's data that is being reflected in the New Visions Data Sorter, the New York City Department of Education Data Extractor and 1 Tutoring in Social Studies Small group and one-to-one, tutoring During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy Social Studies classroom data, we have included additional supports for our students with disabilities, ENL students, and other high-need students. The studentswill receive additional support in our PM School and Saturday Academy. Academic Intervention (AIS) services are determined based on the following: 1. classroom assessments and observations 2. Students most recent progress on Regents examinations 3. Data from students' IEPs 4. Data revealing the levels of our ENL students Based on the school's data that is being reflected in the New Visions Data Sorter, the New York City Department of Education Data Extractor and classroom data, we 2  At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) have included additional supports for our students with disabilities, ENL students, and other high-need students. The studentswill receive additional support in our PM School and Saturday Academy. All Students will receive At-Risk services as needed. We will also provide services for students in the crisis, students needing counseling support as well as academic intervention. Counseling Small group and one-to-one, tutoring During the school day, after school and Saturday Academy 3  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) There are Six (6) students in temporary housing according to the following categories: 1. Three (3) students currently residing in shelters. 2. Three (3) students residing in double housing. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. 4  Students in temporary housing are provided metro cards, free breakfast and lunch, and school school supplies. They are required to meet with our guidance counselor to determine if they are in need of additional services. The school will remain in contact with the family to ensure that we are meeting the needs of the students. The students are afforded the opportunity to participate in all of the academic intervention services that are provided during our regular school hours as well as our after school program and Saturday Academy. They also participate in all school trips and extra-curricular activities provided by our school and our CBO partnerships . Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). The Bronx Community High School is a Title - 1 school. 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. The Bronx Community High School is a Title-1 school. 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. 5 The Bronx Community High School did not receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Strategies for Recruitment In order to attract highly qualified teachers, The Bronx Community High School completes the following five step process: Step -1 All teachers are screened by our New Visions, our Affinity Group prior to their being recommended for the interview process. Step 2 An interview process is conducted by a team of administrators, teachers, students and one member of our New York City Mission Society, our Community Based Organization. Step 3 The team makes a recommendation for a demonstration lesson. Step 4 Candidates are contacted for the purpose of performing a demonstration lesson which is observed by the team. Step 5 The team collaborates on the decision making of the school. Step 6 All teachers are provided on site professional development tailored to meet their varied needs. Step 7 Our Affinity Group provides the opportunity for our teachers to receive support around effective teaching practices. Step 8 Teachers participate in the school’s Inquiry Team work to support the goals and objectives of the school as well as inform their own instructional practices. Step 9 Our staff receives cycles of coaching and ongoing professional development to support development. 7  We will ensure that teachers are hired in their licensed area, and receive the necessary supports in professional development as well as mentoring and coaching. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In order to enhance our work as a team, a cadre of teachers from all content areas will receive support from New Visions as well as reDesign consultants. Staff members will continue to receive support for the teacher team development, and school wide data and school improvement support from New Visions. Teachers will also continue to receive content area and college and career development support from New Visions. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. Not Applicable 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). Not Applicable Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not Applicable 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. During our weekly team meetings which are facilitated by our lead teachers, our staff looks at student data and utilizes the data to gauge and refine assessments; then, makes recommendations. Teachers receive ongoing professional development during our weekly professional development sessions as well as their individual coaching sessions. 8  Teachers are now continuing the Lesson Study as another vehicle for achieving rich instructional practices. They are currently receiving the support of our reDesign consultant and our school leaders to achieve the work. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal 1,994,025.00 0 0 0 Tax Levy (FSF) Local 1,464,214.00 X X Column B Section Reference(s) Section-6 Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section-7 Title-1 Program Information Part 2 (2-A) 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds 9  used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 08X377 Bronx Community High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Community High School will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 1  ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home;  provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report;  host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right 2  to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) School-Parent Compact (SPC) 08X377 Bronx Community High School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will 3  share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards;  using academic learning time efficiently;    offering high quality instruction in all content areas;  providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 4  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent- Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy;  advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 5  ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Bronx Community High School Borough Bronx School Number 377 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Flora Greenaway Coach Morgan ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Ines Perez Ruiz Teacher/Subject Area Noreen Villanueva/Spanish Teacher/Subject Area Sheila James/ELA Related-Service Provider Christine Rivera Superintendent Paul Rotondo Assistant Principal Francis Rollins Coach School Counselor Lucia Dominguez Parent Parent Coordinator Ruth Wise Field Support Center Staff Member Ana Vasquez Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 1 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 1 0 1 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 1 0 D. Student Demographics 7  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 178 Total number of ELLs 18 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 10.11% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 4 K 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? Because the Bronx Community High School accepts students that are overage and under-credited, and were already attending another high school, after enrolling in Bronx Community High School, students take the Achieve 3000 reading program test to assess their reading/comprehension skills. The Achieve 3000 Baseline Assessment is also administered to ELLs by the ESL teacher. This determines their lexile score and reading comprehension level. Based on those assessments, the students prior assessment history, the students is provided a program tailored to meet their inidividual needs in a our heterogeneously grouped classrooms. Our students receive their free standing ESL instruction at the Millennium Art Academy where we share a teacher as well as portions of the LAP. In additional to classroom formative assessment, the students are given three week benchmark assessments to gauge the students understanding of the subject matter as well as progress that is being made by the students. 8  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? The insights this data provides influences literacy based program design across content areas, program placement, proactive grouping, and in-class accommodations/modifications to instruction for the students to aid their in-class performance. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? Item-analysis of Regents scores, NYSESLAT results, benchmark assessments and other periodic-assessments through inquiry teams and house meetings. Teams consist of the ESL teacher, content-teachers, a counselor and principal or assistant principal. We engage in a critical review of students' work, provide valuable feedback and suggest resources and RTI strategies to help students reach expected outcomes. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? The students from the Bronx Community High School participated in the collection of early literacy skills data that led MAA to data driven actions plans for each one of our students which includes data driven instruction geared toward student proficiency levels, purposeful grouping, modified and differentiated instruction, translation when applicable and peer tutoring. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. NYSELAT, ELA and Math Common Core Regents 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Inquiry protocols, Common Planning, ENL push-in Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. MAA implements a Small Group ELL Instructional Program/Freestanding, stand alone model ENL program as well as push-in/integrated ENL model from 9th -12th grade. Students are organized by proficiency level (entering, emerging, transitioning, expanding, commanding) and receive ENL services in push-in classes. The primary goal of our ELL program is to foster full English Proficiency in a supportive risk-free classroom environment as well as to: Expand literacy and academic language, AND Provide students with skills that will allow them to perform at city and state grade level across content areas. MAA programs ENL to meet the learning needs of the student. ENL students are programmed into 5-day a week heterogeneous integration classes taught by the content instructors with push-in instruction from the ENL teacher. Also, all students are programmed for a 5 day a week ELL stand-alone class with the ENL instructor. The purpose of this class is to support mainstream content area classes. IEP students also receive the extra support from the push-in teachers. the standalone class has a push-in teacher for the extra support for the ELL population. b. TBE program. If applicable. 9  N/A c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Students are programmed with 540 minutes per week if they are Beginner ELL (Entering), 360 minutes per week if they are Intermediate (Emerging) and 180 minutes per week if they are Advanced (Expanding). 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As a coherent practice, lesson plans are developed around the Workshop Model and grade-appropriate CCLS. The "Do Now" or "Entrance Ticket" is completed within the first 5-7 minutes of class. The purpose is to activate background knowledge and acclimate student to the lesson. Next is the "Mini-Lesson" in which explicit instruction and/or modeling is executed by the teacher to introduce students to the topic. For example, the teacher may provide a shared-reading for students to annotate or demonstrate a specific writing strategy. Afterwards, students usually get into small groups and complete the assigned task. Each task usually consist of a reading, writing and/or listening and speaking component. Students are encouraged to participate in class discussions by using Accountable Talk and Socratic Seminar. When writing essays, students are encouraged to read their examples of a "strong thesis" or "counterclaim paragraph" for example. This helps them to practice their speaking skills as well as encourages other students to participate in peer review. All assessments (formative and summative) are attached to a rubric which is distributed and reviewed before the task is assigned. In addition, students are prep to write essays to help them prepare for the ELA Regents as well as the NYSESLAT. The ENL teacher works in conjunction with the ELA teachers to better serve our students in the language department. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? The Bronx Community High School works in conjunction with the MAA ensures that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home language throughout the year given their proficiency levels. Students who are labeled entering will be given content-area exams in the home language. As students’ proficiency levels advance content-area exams will be modified to have both English and their home language. This service is provided to our ELLs population through the Spanish class. In the Spanish class they are constantly evaluated throughout the year. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status SIFE and newcomer students receive intensive support from their ESL teacher in the ENL classroom and also from the content area teachers based on th results of the LAB-R or the NYSESLAT. They are provided academic intervention services as well as counseling to support their individual needs. They are paired with teachers or students of similar language backgrounds to help acclimate them to the school and foster their interpersonal skills. Our Community Based Organization, Missions Society, provide Advocate Counselors whom work closely with ELLs to support their socioemotional needs. In the classroom, they are provided with a plethora of scaffolds and visual aids to support their learning. The use of differentiated texts via Kaplan and Achieve 3000, ThinkCerca to "meet them where they are." They receive explicit instruction and modeling from teachers so that they understand expected outcomes assessments Intermediate ELLs receive their New York State Education Department (NYSED) mandated 360 minutes of ENL weekly instruction in 57 minutes classes five days per week. They are provided with the latest technology such as powerpoints, 0  tutorials, podcasts, simulated learning via youtube, vimeo, discovery ed, etc. ELLs with 4 or more years status as an ELL's performance expectations are slightly higher. Their instruction includes more mainstream CCLS. For example, they are expected to decode complex texts and do literary analysis and argumentative writing (5-6 paragraphs). Beginner ELLs are receiving instruction according to the 540 minutes mandated by the NYSED for ENL standard in 57 minutes five period per day classes. They are expected to write less, perhaps 3-4 paragraphs or less-depth paragraphs. All ELLs, regardless of proficiency status, receive test accomodations, i.e. extra time, separate location, bilingual dictionaries in all classes. Teacher work with these students on a one- to one basis to make sure that the students have understanding and be able to catch up. Long Term ELLs, students with six or more years receive 180 mnutes of mandated ENL and ELA instruction in heterogeneously grouped content area classrooms based on their proficiency level in 57 minute five days per week classes. Former ELLs are provided equal access to all core academic classes, electives, extra-curricular activities, tutoring. Former ELLs are also provided all appropriate testing modifications as well as other requests made by the parents or school leadership. They are also entitled to all other mandated services such as SETSS and ICT. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Inaddition to our ENL classes, our ELL students receive their instruction in five periods per day, five days per week of 57 minutes duration. ELL students with IEP's receive single periods of SETSS and ICT instructions to support their academic development. To assist our ELLs in the improvement of their overall writing skills, teachers are available for one-on-one tutoring sessions in their classrooms. Our students receive an instructional program that is aligned with Common Core standards. In addition to the targeted instruction, every student is given the opportunity to receive tutoring in the core academic classes as well as focused instructions to prepare them for the Regents examinations. Our ELLs attend these programs receiving additional academic support across the curriculum. These programs as well as our core curriculum classes focus on overall literacy skill development. Resources, instruction and assessment are leveled and differentiated. Our English teachers delivers small group instruction on writing skills. In order to gauge our students' progress, our teachers administer a baseline assessment to assess the needs of our students. Students are then provided ongoing formative assessments and benchmarks assessments every three weeks to provide a summative assessment of the work in progress.Teachers conduct an evaluative assessment to determine the individual strengths and weaknesses of each student. Students reaching proficiency on the NYSESLAT will continue to receive instruction in the ELA classes. We continue to build our classroom libraries to offer our students a wide variety of leveled reading materials in core subject areas as well as class sets of dictionaries in English and the native languages of our ELL population. Alternate textbooks, graphic organizers, leveled non-fiction books, and Multimedia are utilized to differentiate instruction. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our instructional program is designed to monitor and support the language development, IEP goals and academic progress of our ELL SWP; therefore, the student program for our ELL SWP reflects stand alone ENL classes and resource room according to the mandates of of their ENL SWD mandates. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. All intervention services are offered in English. ENL teacher pushes into content classes on a as needs basis. In the ENL class, teacher uses the double-dose method to provide support in ELL struggling areas. We also use techniques such as repetitive language, rapid pacing, modeling, time to practice and discuss reading, and systematic and explicit instruction when reading complex texts. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? 1  This school year, our school will design a technology classroom to support the use of technology in the classroom for our students. Our students will also receive after school tutoring in support of their ENL and all of their core academic subjects. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? The BCHS will not be discontinuing any program or services for our ENL students because our current program meets the needs of our ELL population. We have already discontinued our program in which our ELL's were only receiving instruction in the ELL classroom, and replace it with a stand alone ENL class which is being taught by our licensed, certified ENL teacher. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. Our ELL's are always informed and afforded the opportunity to participate in all programs offered at our school. In order to support the academic as well as social skills development, students with disabilities, English Language Learners, and other high-need students receive their instruction in all of our core academic classes; they are afforded the required number of classes, SETSS and ICT classes as needed as well as mandated levels of ENL classes. ELLs are also given equal access to all after school programs, Saturday Academy, guidance and counseling support and all other programs that are offered by our school. ELLs are also afforded equal opportunity to the following after school and supplemental services provided by our school: 1. Tracking of their academic progress and attendance via House and bi-weekly department meetings, creating goals and action- plans to re-engage borderline students 2. Offering incentives for students in good standing (attendance and academically) 3. Academic Intervention Services (zero period, lunch-tutoring, after-school support) 4. Small group instruction across content areas 5. Co-teaching ELLs in Humanities classes 6. Offering Saturday Academic courses 7. SETSS for ELLs with IEPs 8. The Achieve 3000 Program 9. At-Risk services as needed such as crisis intervention and counseling support 10. All college readiness and awareness programs 11. All after school clubs. sports teams or any other extra-curricular programs provided by our school 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The school purchases bilingual resources to assist students in their content area classes. The ENL coordinator also uses the following programs:- Power Up Reading for special needs and long term ELLs (includes a technological component).- Keys to Learning for Newcomer ELLs (includes a technological component). Words Their Way for English Language Learners for all ELLs.- Various videos, songs, and multimedia devices such as iPads, digital recorders and cameras are used for experiential learning. achieve3000.com, Think Circa Writing Program scholastic.com, engageny.com, Digital Literacy. we also have Different level reading books for independent reading. Vocabulary books, ESL grammar texts are also used as well as " Getting Ready For The NYSESLAT" book to insure that our students are getting all the help that they can get. 2  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The home language support is delivered to all students in our Spanish class which is being taught by a teacher that is fluent in Spanish and English. those students who might have a problem understanding something in English is helped in Spanish by the ENL teacher who teaches Spanish as well. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. House systems comprised of content-area teachers, counselors, parent-coordinator meet once a week, in which a detailed review of students' progress, entitled services, attendance records, etc is conducted. Students are programmed according to their mandated services as per ELL proficiency levels and IEP services. Students are also programmed into classes to prepare them for Regents exams. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? achieve3000.com, colorin colarado, scholastic.com, engageny.com, Digital Literacy, freerice.com, we have most of our oun materials for our ELLs population. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). The Bronx Community only admits students that are over age and undercredited and were already enrolled in high school for at least one school year. ELL students arrive at our school already designated as ELLs. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Presently, the Bronx Community High School does not offer any language electives. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teacher attends regularly scheduled professional development and training for ENL teachers that are offered by the New York City Department of Education DOE). Our school also provides regularly scheduled professional development and Inquiry team work during our designated professional development day on Monday from 2:20 p.m. - 3:45 p.m. In addition, our teachers receive professional development and coaching from our Affinity group as well as our external coaches and consultants. Our ENL teacher also participates in our literacy across content areas, as well as our current writing initiative. Our ENL teacher also pushes into other core academic classes to provide additional support for our ENL and other struggling learners. All teachers of ELLs at our school participarte in biweekly meetings (via House and Dept Meetings) to review information about ELLs (i.e. new students, proficiency levels, academic progress, attendance records and behavior across classes). Teachers and advocate-counselors review students' academic status, discuss areas in need of intervention, create a list of next steps and goals for each student to help them progress to the subsequent "house" (grade level) 3  Our ENL teacher regularly attends Professional Developments offered by the DOE DELLS or New Visions to learn the best practices available for ELLs in secondary school. School administrators also provide workshops on Citywide Instructional Expectations aligned to Common Core Standards. Our professional development is designed to ensure literacy across content area, the shifts in ELA, our writing initiative, and the Danielson Framework for Effective Teacher Practices. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Because the BCHS is a transfer school, our students only transfer to our school as an overage and undercredited high school student. At the point of their transfer, our students are provided the services needed via our New York City Missions Society, our community based organization (CBO) which provides a program manager, advocates counselors and a social worker to address the students' transition to our school as well as the socio-emotional support. Our House teams which are comprised of a house leader (Lead Teacher) and a team of teachers, guidance counselor, CBO and our parent coordinator to whom students are assigned to immediately acclimate the students to our schools culture which entails our schools academic and social skills development. Our guidance counselor also plays an integral role in providing programming support that meets the mandates for all students, mandated counseling, mandated counseling and student parent outreach. Our guidance counselor attends ongoing professional development focused on ENL, guidance and counseling, programming in our academic program and other school related topics to ensure that our school is in compliance. Our Coordinator of Student Affairs (COSA) provides students leadership training as well as other extra-curricular activities for all students which includes our ENL population. They are also placed with a House Leader to acclimate them to the new school/grade or "house", track their credit accumulation and facilitate their socio-emotional needs. Records of agendas and minutes from workshops are kept in a binder in the ma office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parent letters are offered annually to notify parents of their childs' NYSESLAT results (proficiency levels), as well as attendance records, academic status, Regents results and areas in need of intervention. Translation services are provided by the Bilingual Counselor and/or Parent Coordinator. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Parents of ELLs are encouraged to join the Parent-Teacher Association , the School Leadeship Team as well as school Parent Orientation at the beginning of the school year/new cycle. Parents regularly receive mailing and school newsletter as well as a parent survey which enables the school to provide tailored services to meet the needs of our parents. Our school also provides a parent room for our parents every Friday form 12:00 p.m. - 2:20 p.m. as a welcome center to encourage our parents to come in and become acclimated with our school's culture and provide additional support for our school as well as other parents. Our parents are invited to all of our extra-curricular student acitivities and all of our open school nights Our campus also affords our parents the opportunity to participate in our laundromat services which is provided for all parents. Parents are called by the ENL teacher or the Parent coordinator, guidance counselor to ensure that they understand, in case the parent only speaks Spanish. 4  Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. The school partners with community organizations such as New York City Mission Society, Community Word Project, Lead by Example, Arts Partnership, are always extended invitations in their preferred language to watch their child, or participate in an appropriate manner. When these organizations hold sessions for parents, such as plays, opportunities to volunteer, and accompany the school on an out of school field trip, the bilingual parent coordinator or the ENL coordinator informs the parent through mail and phone calls in their preferred language. The ENL coordinator and Parent Coordinator also inform parents when other parent events occur through other organizations, such as the Office of English Language Learners. Translation services are available through the parent coordinator. A space was not provided for a response for question number two. Below is our school's response: Our House teams and school leaders schedule regular meetings with students and their parents to discuss ou students progress. The Hosue teams keeps a record of those meetings. The guidance counselor and attendance teacher also ilogs parent meeting via the ATS system. Our CBO also logs their meetings with parents. All PTA and SLT meetings are also kept on file, and parents' attendance at our school Open School Night and school activities/celebrations are kept on file with parent signatures enclosed. 5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Flora Greenaway, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Community High School School DBN: 08X377 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Flora Greenaway Title Principal Francis Rollins Assistant Principal Ruth Wise Parent Coordinator Ines Perez-Ruiz ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Sheila Cousins James Teacher/Subject Area Christine Rivera Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Lucia Dominguez School Counselor Juan Mendez Mariano Guzman S. Dawn Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x377 School Name: Bronx Community High School Superintendent: Juan Mendez The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this (*Primary) conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. During our parent/ student intake interviews we identify student preferred language based upon the interview with the parent or guardian. In addition, we generate the information from the preferred language portion located on the Blue emergency contact card. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral English, Spanish, 8  3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to Families plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Intake flyers,Parent conference letters, Attendance letters, Administrative meetings, School bell schedule, Benchmark schedule, After school and Saturday academy sessions, Testing information such as Regents, PSAT, ASVAB. Report card, progress reports 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Family Night on October 30 th , parent conferences on November 17th - 18th and March 23rd - 24th, Parent Teacher Association meeting (PTA) one Thursday of each month, School Leadership team meeting (SLT), leadership meetings to discuss student progress and interventions after each benchmark, Student intake meetings with parents to discuss our schools policies and student expectations, IEP plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 9  meetings with our special education teachers and related service providers, school-wide celebrations and events such as Student Achievement Night and awards ceremonies. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) English and Spanish Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? ilog (ATS), school survey, feedback from our parent association meetings., Parent teacher conferences 0 
