 09X413 School Name: BRONX HIGH SCHOOL FOR MEDICAL SCIENCE Principal: WILLIAM QUINTANA   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Bronx High School For Medical Science 320-9000-11413 School Number (DBN): 09X413 BEDS Code: Grades Served: 6-12 School Address: 240 East 172 Street, Bronx, NY 10457 Phone Number: 718-410-4040 Fax: 718-992-4129 School Contact Person: William Quintana Email Address: wquinta@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: William Quintana Maureen Watts Joanne Brown Wendy Mercedes Erwin Serrano Reem Mozab Crismarli Marte N/A District Information Geographical District: 09 Superintendent’s Office Address: Mr.Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 Metrotech Center, Brooklyn, NY 111201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3068 Phone Number: FSC: Bronx 718-935-3068 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director:   1 Fordham Plaza, Room 811, Bronx, NY 10458 Executive Director’s Office Address: Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 741-7746 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) William Quintana Maureen Watt Joanne Brown Romeo Rotgans Erwin Serrano Reem Mozab Crismarli Marte N / A Wendy Mercedes Sarah Lenihan Lenice Howe *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT / SLT Chair Member/ CSA Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Nakia Wilson Marleny Martinez Felipe Rojas Lewis Cabarrouy Katrina Klinke Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of the school is to graduate well-articulated students with the skills to make them competitive to be accepted and succeed at the college of their choice. Everyone at the school is committed to equip all our students with the math, science, reading, writing, technological, and interpersonal skills that will open the doors to higher education. The school’s rigorous curriculum and our internship program expose students to the medical and health professions at an early age and motivate them to choose a career in one of those disciplines. The High School for   Medical Science and the Dr. Mary E. Walker Medical Science Academy provide a caring educational community where students are exposed to a variety of medical sciences. By the end of their senior year, students make a contribution to the health of our school’s community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx High School for Medical Science is a middle-high school with 472 students from grade 6 through grade 12. The school population comprises 35% Black, 55% Hispanic, 1% White, and 7% Asian students. The student body includes 3% English language learners and 12% special education students. Boys account for 42% of the students enrolled and girls account for 58%. The average attendance rate for the school year 2013-14 was 93.8%.This school offers a standards-based curriculum with embedded courses in science that prepares students to enter the college of their choice. In collaboration with CUNY and the Harlem Children Society, students have the opportunity to shadow health care professionals during the school day, after school, and on weekends. Students do research under the supervision of trained medical personnel and in our two science labs. These labs include a Forensic Medicine lab equipped with all the supplies to perform college type advanced science research projects. There is also collaboration with Bronx Community College, Hostos Community College, and Lehman College for a College Now Program that offers students the opportunity to take Medical terminology, Pre-Calculus, Chemistry Informatics, Psychology, Sociology, Expository Writing, and Community Health during the school year. The High School for Medical Science was established on September 2002 to fill the need for a school featuring a medical science program in our area. The school is one of seven theme-based schools at the William Howard Taft Educational Campus. The school expanded its services to 6 th graders under the umbrella of the Dr. Mary E. Walker Medical Science Academy on September 2005. Recently, the school neighborhood has experienced large waves of immigration from the Caribbean Islands (mainly the Dominican Republic), Central America, and Africa; our school is a viable choice for this community. Our school follows an extended day program in a multiple session structure with nine periods a day. We followed a uniform policy for students; the uniform is provided for free at the beginning of the school year to all entering freshman classes. The hunter green scrub is unique of high school students; the hunter green is exhibited at all doors across the floor. A mint green scrub is unique of all middle school students; the mint green is exhibited at all walls across the floor. Our school follows a school-wide self-contained model; this model fosters the rotation of teachers from classroom to classroom. Students take ownership of their classrooms and develop strong bonds among themselves. Cutting classes is eliminated and attendance improves. In addition, the passing time allowed in the bell schedule to accommodate the needs of other schools in the campus is used for instruction. The HSMS is the only school in the city with a school-wide program that graduates one third of the entering cohort in three years. This in-house educational opportunity affords students the possibility to start college a year earlier than their peers. Consequently, early college starters have the possibility to graduate a year ahead from their peers; which may place them in an employment status before their classmates. By the time these early high school graduates reach a retirement age, they may have accumulated an extra year into their pension funds. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. 0  We have a 17.57% of students with IEPs; 2.82 % of our population receive Related Services only, 40.85% of students receiving related services spend less than 20% of the week receiving those services. 43.66% spend between 21% and 59% of the week receiving those services, and 4.23% spend more than 60% of their week schedule in integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes. 7.04% receive Self-Contained services >60% of the week. 9.9% of our population is ELL. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The school established a classroom and school culture where students felt safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Our focus for this school year will be Rigorous Instruction: Our instruction will increase the rigor in all classrooms. Students will be actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activities to foster better critical thinking skills. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 09X413 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08,09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 433 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 30 29 16 14 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 19 10 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 83.0% % Attendance Rate 82.2% % Reduced Lunch 12.7% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.5% 61.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 16.25 10% 16% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 44.9% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 95% 87% 89.4% 16.7% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A YES N/A N/A YES Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A YES High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 4 4 92.3% 0.7% 19.9% 28.2% 7.6% 1.4% 4 58% 3.5 31.2% 66% 94% 89% 90.8% 34% N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A YES YES N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A YES N/A N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths relative to this Framework elements are student achievement as measured by our graduation rate, Regents scores (9-12), NYS ELA and Math scores (6-8) and End of Year (EOY) assessments (6-12). 2. A priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this framework is alignment of student tasks and lesson planning to the appropriate Common Core and content standard. This is based from the Superintendent PPO review on April 11, 2018. Therefore, collectedly as a school we will be building capacity in revising units of study across the curriculum and properly aligning them as per recommendation. We will also implement rigor and differentiation in daily lessons that align to the HSMS Instructional Focus. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all HSMS teacher teams will engage all students by thoughtfully planning lessons that are academically and social emotionally rigorous by using developmentally appropriate student-centered task. Students in grades 6-8 will demonstrate effective collaboration, students in grades 9-10 will engage in critical thinking and students in grades 11-12 will exhibit effective communication. This will be measured by administrative feedback on units of study, ADVANCE observation rating in Danielson framework components 1E and 3C and increase student performance from Beginning of Year (BOY) assessments to End of Year (EOY) assessments. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to enhance rigorous instruction, teacher teams will engage in revisions of units of study to be more standard base and Regents aligned by using the UBD approach. Advance Observation ratings in Danielson framework components 1E and 3C. Increase students’ performance from BOY to EOY 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All teacher teams working in Content Area Team (CAT) and Grade Level Team (GLT) All ADVANCE eligible teachers Students Start and End of each marking period Lead Teacher of Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal September-June BOY, MOY, EOY ADVANCE eligible teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal All teachers, Assistant Principals, Principal How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. The High School for Medical Science , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Medical Science will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 4  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. A Pupil Personnel Committee (PPC) consisting of a guidance counselor, administrators, and teachers has been established to develop strategies to deal with at-risk students.Some of the issues and concerns that the committee addresses include: student attendance, behavioral issues, and academic performance. The committee is also a resource to parents. The Academic Intervention Services and Response To Interventions are funded with allocations from Tax Levy and Title I School Wide Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. In teacher teams, teachers will focus on analyzing student data using Looking at Student Work (LASW) protocol to identify common misconceptions and areas of improvement for all students. Using RTI intervention, teachers will identify 5-10 students in which they will do targeted instruction during Tutoring Tuesdays. By February 2019, teachers will identify struggling students and offer additional support services through Pupil Personnel Services (PPS). Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Ilogs. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? The school’s Superintendent highlighted in his his April 11, 2018 PPO report "the school's approach to culture-building, and student-adult relationships resulting in a safe environment that promotes positive academic and personal behaviors." Therefore, we will focus on reinforcing positive behaviors. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of the school’s focus on reinforcing positive behaviors, by June 2019, there will be a 2% decrease in level 3 infractions as measured by Online Occurrence Reporting System (OORS); by the same token, we will be increasing students' accomplishments celebrations. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Guidance counselors will meet students at the beginning of each school year and at the end of each marking period to discuss a Graduation Passport and to plan the road-map for a Regents Diploma or Advanced Regents Diploma. Guidance counselors, Parent Coordinator, and admin team will meet students in March to educate them about the completion of the Learning Environmental Survey. Guidance counselors will meet parents and legal guardians at the beginning of each school year, at the end of each marking period to discuss a Graduation Passport and to plan the road-map for a Regents Diploma or Advanced Regents Diploma. They will also meet them in March to educate them about the completion of the Learning Environmental Survey. Parents. The admin team and UFT Chapter Leader will meet all faculty to highlight the importance of completing the Learning Environmental Survey. Staff. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? All students. Quarterly informal assessments.. Guidance Counselors All Students. March Guidance Counselors / Parent Coordinator./ APs / Principal Guidance Counselors / Assistant Principals / Parent Coordinator / Principal Admin Team / UFT Chapter Leader. Environmental Survey. Quarterly informal assessments and March Environmental Survey. March Environmental Survey. How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental attendance and participation at PA meetings will increase every month. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Guidance Meetings and PA Meetings will receive additional funding to meet this goal. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 7  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring X SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Quarterly informal assessments, as well as the March Learning Environmental Survey. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Learning Environmental Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The Superintendent indicated in his April 11, 2018 PPO a need to outline a process by which the collective efficacy in each department will have an impact on each teacher. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, teacher teams will “have the structures in place to evaluate the quality of school-level decisions.” All teacher teams will have a common planning period, which will allow them to work productively on increasing student achievement. As measured by an increase from fair to good on the Collaborative Teachers section of the annual School Quality Snapshot. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). In order to demonstrate effective collaboration in grades 6-8, teacher teams will engage in peer inter-visitations, glows and grows of unit plans and use assessment data to inform instruction. In order to engage in critical thinking in grades 9-10, teacher teams will engage in peer inter-visitations, glows and grows of unit plans and use assessment data to inform instruction. In order to exhibit effective communication in grades 11-12, teacher teams will engage in peer inter-visitations, glows and grows of unit plans and use assessment data to inform instruction. N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Grades 6-8, Teacher Teams September – June Lead Teacher of Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal Grades 9-10, Teacher Teams Grades 11-12, Teacher Teams September – June September – June Lead Teacher of Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal Lead Teacher of Teams, Assistant Principals, Principal N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental attendance and participation at school-wide events will increase monthly,. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Data Specialist will assist administrators and teachers in developing strategies to increase students' performance at ELA CCLS differentiated tasks..The Academic Intervention Services and Response To Interventions will target at risk students to align their progress with the benchmarks targeted at MOSL selections. All these activities are funded with allocations from Tax Levy and Title I School Wide Program. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5 – Progress Monitoring 0  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Analysis of Marking Period Results and Scholarship Reports at the end of each marking period. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Scholarship Reports. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The 2016-207 QR and the Superintendent's April 11, 2018 PPO concurred in highlighting our distributive leadership practices. Therefore, we will continue in expanding opportunities for staff to be promoted into schoolwide leadership roles. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the school will promote at least two teachers to take upon the responsibility of becoming Model Teachers. This initiative will foster building teachers’ capacity through distributive leadership. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Through inter-visitations and mentoring, Model teachers will build efficacy among teachers to enhance teacher practice in Danielson framework observation ratings in components 1E and 3C. Lead Teacher of Teams will build capacity among teachers and use progress monitoring to inform instruction effectiveness and the need for changes in instruction or interventions of ELLs and students with special needs. N/A N/A 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers and Model Teachers September – June Model Teachers, Assistant Principal and Principal. ENLs, SPED Students, Teachers and Lead Teacher of Teams September – June Lead Teacher of Teams, Assistant Principal and Principal. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parental responses for the Environmental Survey will increase by the end of April. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Related service provider logs, operating protocols, lists of students served, agendas of school based inquiry team meetings, plus cut-scores will identify students who are performing at benchmark; as well as at-risk and seriously at-risk students. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 3  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. The strongest decisions in education are guided by data. Whether data is from summative assessments, formative assessments or other sources, it's essential that this data be analyzed to determine the best or most effective strategies. The analysis of data has to be an on-going process throughout the school year. Therefore, we have implemented a uniform assessment calendar at the end of each marking period that will be monitored by our Inquiry Team. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Summative and Formative Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 1. The school’s strengths relative to this Framework are ASPIRA, ACCESS-VR, College Now, Geriatric Career Development (GCD), The New Jewish Home and School Leadership Team (SLT) . 2. The priority need that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element is to continue the partnerships above and expand the community ties while exposing our students to real life organizations and creating opportunities for college and career readiness. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. As a result of a 20% increase by June 2018, the number of families attending Parent-Teacher Conference will reflect on their answers an increase in the score for the Family-Community ties section of the School Quality Snapshot from fair to good. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Parental attendance and participation at PA meetings will increase every month All Parents Sept-Jun Parental responses for the Environmental Survey will increase by the end of April. All Parents Mar-April Parent Coordinator, Guidance Coordinator, Supporting Personnel, Planning Team, Principal Parent Coordinator, Guidance Coordinator, Supporting Personnel Parental attendance and participation at school-wide events will increase monthly. All Parents Sept-JUn School Community 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. ASPIRA of New York Inc. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Parent Coordinator and PA budget Allocation Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 6  Quarterly monitoring of attendance to meetings and events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Signing Sheets and Agendas. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Grades 6-8: Students performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on NYS ELA. Grade 9: Students who performed at Level 1 or Level 2 on NYS Grade 8 ELA. Grades 10–12: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on the ELA Regents. Grades 6-8: Students performing at Level 1 or Level 2 on NYS Math. Grade 9: Students who performed at Level 1 or Level 2 on NYS Grade 8 Math. Grades 10–12: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on the Algebra Regents. Grades 6-9: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on a science course after the 1 st marking period. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Repeated Readings, Interactive Writing Small Group / One to One After School Portfolio Differentiated Learning Flexible Grouping Small Group Tutoring After School Reduced Teacher Student Ratio Differentiated Learning Flexible Grouping Small Group Tutoring After School Portfolio / Saturday School for H.S. Credit recovery / Saturday School for M.S. Regents Review 8  Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Grades 10–12: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on the Liv. Env. Regents. Grades 6-9: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on a social studies course after the 1 st marking period. Grades 10–12: Students who scored below the approved passing grade on the Global or USH Regents. Students with IEPs at risk of not being promoted and all of those at risk of not graduating. Differentiated Learning Flexible Grouping Small Group Tutoring After School / Extended Day for Credit Recovery Group Counseling / One to One / Counseling Lessons After School / On-Going Sessions Transcript Review / Exit Interviews / Crisis Counseling / Parent Meetings for LTAs and PIDs, and pending grads 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 13 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. RTI, AIS, Counseling. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment, retention, assignments and support that ensures staff is highly qualified demand a direct correlation between the schools’ working conditions for the teachers and its educational quality. Teachers’ quality of life within schools is the most critical yet more frequently overlooked ingredient in education reform. Many institutions do not even offer the basic amenities of a locked closet for teachers’ personal; belongings and working tools for their professional development. New teachers entering the system are typically assigned to the most disadvantaged schools and placed in the most challenging conditions with the neediest students. Mentoring and institutional support are seldom part of the equation. At the HS for Medical Science, administrators and supervisors encourage self-reflection and collegiality by fostering a new enthusiasm about teaching and a growing respect for the profession. Teachers participate of weekly grade level meetings, share a school wide common planning time during the day, and experienced teachers function as lead teachers. We have a New Teachers Mentoring Committee providing assistance, guidance, and support to all first year teachers. The committee is made up of our UFT Chapter Leader, Principal, Assistant Principals, Lead Teachers, Model Teacher and Guidance Coordinator. All first year teachers are paired with a seasoned teacher acting as his/her mentor. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Professional Development of staff is at the heart of making the High School for Medical Science a learning community of professionals that are working to build capacity among staff stakeholders in an effort to improve outcomes for all students. PD activities are ongoing throughout the school day and the school year and can generally be divided into three types; off-site, in-house and on call. In house PD opportunities generally take the form of meetings during a universally assigned Professional Development period (7th for the 2016-2017 school year) such as the Professional Learning Team (PLT) which includes the entire UFT staff and meets every Wednesday, GRT or Grade Level Teams, which meet on Mondays to discuss common concerns, expectations and best practices amongst teachers of a particular grade, and CAT or Content Area Teams, which meet Thursdays to discuss departmental matters such as curricula content and unpacking of standards. In addition to these regular standard meetings, staff also partake of ‘specialty’ meetings such as IEP or Curriculum Planning as needed throughout the year. Teams follow standard protocols in meetings such as creating agendas, collecting sign sheets and rotating responsibilities to facilitate, gather data, set goals, and develop measurable strategies for improvement. PLT topics are set by the administrative staff 2  after reviewing cumulative Advance teacher rating data, internally produced teacher surveys and Citywide Instructional Expectations. PLT meetings have a different Danielson Framework for Teaching component focus every month employing differentiated practices to present material such as watching videos, reading selections, pair discussions and whole group presentations. Off-site and on-call professional development opportunities are generally provided by the NYCDOE or the Borough Field Support Centers. Examples of DOE PD include Advance trainings offered to administrators and teacher leaders at the city-wide level and webinars on testing or HR matters. The BFSC offers supports in trainings offered to specific parties such as Guidance Counselors and Paraprofessionals during citywide PD designated days and site visits by support Specialists. On call site visits generally take the form of staff presentations on matters such as writing IEP goals and Present Levels of Performance or to specifically work alongside teachers in developing plans, aligning CCLS tasks, developing effective performance tasks and so on. Examples of topics covered in PLT PD include; effective questioning, Depth of Knowledge, SMART goals, learning targets, instructional shifts to the common core, UDL, student engagement and assessment in instruction. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N / A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N / A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N / A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. All staff embrace in periodic and thorough review of our School Report Cards, Progress Reports, Quality Review and Quality Review Self-Assessment documents, periodic assessments, and SKEDULA reports; as well as reviewing the results of our Inquiry Team action research, surveys, and school-based assessments. Data gathered from all those sources is used to foster an existing good practice of interdisciplinary dialogue and common planning between 3  teachers of different subjects. The interdisciplinary dialogue and common planning practices have a direct effect in the lesson planning and creation of formal and informal assessment pieces. On the other hand, the creation of a stronger data culture in the school is an ongoing process. This data culture facilitates continuous data analysis of student performance and progress to disaggregated ethnic groups, gender trends and socioeconomic influences to improve our services. Consequently, our school community focuses in making sure that all action plans consistently identify clear measurable targets, allocate responsibilities to named people and include specific time frames. We want to ensure that teachers give students consistently clear feedback, explaining what they have done well and how to improve their work further, especially when work is displayed. Several teams are in place and they meet regularly in both content teams and grade teams and engage in collaborative conversations about students whom they share. Teachers are at the beginning stages of giving feedback on instructional practices in order to improve student understanding. The school has a team that is focused on using an inquiry approach to strengthen curriculum and pedagogy, 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Part 4b of Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D, and 5E. Part 4b of Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D and 5E. Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 333,056.00 0 0 0 2,854,101.00 X X 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 4  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 5   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 6  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent Involvement Policy (PIP) Template Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X413, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Medical Science will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 7  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 8  ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. 09X413, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The High School for Medical Science will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 9  ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); 0  ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) 09X413, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; 1  ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: 2  ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 3  ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 4  ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities 5  ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 7  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 8 Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem 9  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL 0  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 09 School Name High School for Medical Science Borough Bronx School Number 413 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal William Quintana Coach type here ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Illiannette Cirino Teacher/Subject Area Dilicia Perez Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Anna-Marie Oliverio Superintendent Michael Alcoff Assistant Principal Shirley Ithier Coach type here School Counselor Joseph Burgos Parent Erwin Serrano Parent Coordinator Antonio Melendez Field Support Center Staff Member Socorro Diaz Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 2 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 2 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 421 1 Total number of ELLs 59 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 14.01%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Lang. N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tools used to assess the literacy skills of ELL students are the NYSESLAT (using modalities) , LAB-R/NYSITELL and City Wide Reading/Math exam report as well for middle school students and incoming 9th graders. That data acquired through these assessment tools helps the teachers collaborate and create strategies that will help students improve in the areas of word sentence reading, passage comprehension, and sentence completion. In turn building skills in the four areas of testing reading, writing, listening and speaking in order to reach proficiency. All data collected from assessments is used for programming and planning. Teachers are able to identify the needs of the students and appropriately plan for the upcoming school years addressing all content areas for student improvement. HSMS has 59 ENLs out of those are 40 Middle School students grades 6-8 and 19 are High School students grades 9-12. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 2  Guidance Counselor meetings with ESL teacher and students in each group to track down iperformance and improvement prior to NYSESLAT. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The purpose of the ENL program at the High School for Medical Science & The Dr. Mary E. Walker Medical Science Academy is to help students continue to progress academically while they are developing stronger English language Skills. This is accomplished via pushin and pullout sessions with highly effective ESL teahcers as well as specialized instruction for students with special needs. Smaller instructional groups and differentiated instruction materials to help students access learning and building skills in order to meet NYS Common Core Learning Standards 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Results from NYSESLAT, plus BOY and MOY, added to end of each marking period results. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] HSMS is a 6-12 school. In the Middle School grades we use RTI to provide the students with home work help and building skills in areas of weakness that will allow them to work at the same pace as the students in their grades. The NYSESLAT modalities , LAB-R/NYSITELL and State Exam levels are used to assist teachers to properly prepare to work with their students. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The higher the proficiency level reflected on both the LAB-R/NYSITELL and NYSESLAT, the higher the grades for ELA and Social Studies will be. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Assessment data from DOE Principal's portal workbooks and in-house access to assessment data for the students in this group. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. HSMS offers a Free Standing ENL progarm following the Push-In/Pull-Out and self contained model. b. TBE program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: c. DL program. If applicable. Paste response to questions here: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? 3  HSMS offers a Free Standing ENL program following the Push-In/Pull-Out and self contained model, which provides research based ENL strategies and methodologies to help meet our ENLs needs. The ENL teachers collaborates with classroom teachers to build upon classroom instruction and modify instruction and assignments thereby scaffolding classroom work. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. As per CR-15 ELA is the foundaton for NLA, ENL and ELA curriculum. HSMS assigns the required units of study ot ensure alignment with program models required and delivery of services. For grades 6-8 360 minutes of ENL instruction are provided at the beginner level ( Entering/Emerging), Students at an intermediate (Transitioning) / High Intermediate level ( Expanding) receive 180 minutes of ENL instruction, at the Advanced level (Expanding*/Commanding) student receive 90 minutes of ENL instruction. Each content area provides the following: English Language Arts which has daily literacy blocks ( 2 pds daly/10 pds wkly). The mathematics program model of instruction has ( 2 pds dly/ 10 pds wkly) and is fully aligned with the requirements for the NYS Department of Education and Common Core Standards. The Science Program is also fully aligned. The 11 th and 12 th grade complete a one year sequence in either Environmental Science,Physical Science, Anatomy, Health & Nutrition, AP Chemistry, Analytical Chemistry. Science offers a unified system of instruction across grades 6-12. In social studies, instruction is provided to support students with understanding social studies content, current events and other social sciences such as Sociology and Psychology. Responsible for two NYS Regents exams, all instruction in Social Studies is based on acquiring critical analysis skills, interpretation of document based questions (DBQs) and test sophistication with double periods of instruction. A global view of world events and cultures are explored in Global History in grades 10 and 11. The Foreign Language course work is accomplished in all modalities of speaking, listening, reading and writing of the Spanish language. In beginning courses, students are exposed to basic structures of greeting, basic grammar, situational translation, and basic conjugation of verbs with a focus on reading comprehension. Intermediate foreign language course work explores sentence structure, writing expositions and more advanced conjugation with focus on conversational skills. Advanced Foreign language coursework continues to advance student proficiency in grammar, conversation and writing, but primarily focuses on critical reading and analysis fo Spanish Language literature. In HSMS Arts and Music is offered to students in Studio Art and Keyboard, Vocal & Music appreciation. *Expanding student can test out if the same year they take NYSESLAT, they get a 3 or higher in the NYS ELA exam for grades 6-8 or a 65 and higher in the ELA Regents for grades 9-12. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? At HSMS there are two types of incoming students, those with records which carry a history of records on ATS or hard copy and those without records who come to us as over the counter (OTC). All incoming students receive the Home Language Survey to ensure they have a copy on file. Students entering new from another country are scheduled to take the NYSITELL within the first 10 days of their admission date. Once done, students are identified and provided with services until the NYSESLAT is given in the Spring to determine the students levels of proficiency. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status a) a) At the present time HSMS does not have any identified SIFE students. b) For ENL's who are newcomers or have less than three years in the United States, we offer a Free Standing ENL program with a full-time ENL certified teacher, the goal of our ENL program is for students to acquire the language development necessary to transition into higher proficiency levels (Emerging, Transitioning, Expanding and Commanding) and ultimately test out of ENL all together. Students who are new to our school system are not necessarily in beginning levels of proficiency, therefore, we program these students in the level in which their proficiency rests. We schedule individualized meetings to track the progress of these new comers and to case conference on their specific needs. Measurable goals are set for the newcomer ENL, much like and IEP, where the ultimate goal is to successfully meet the New Common Core Learning Standards 4  for NYS ELA Regents and the NYS English Language Arts exam for Middle School. Through test prep, mock exams, RTI progress monitoring, and test reviews the newcomer ENL students are taught the specific skills needed for their end of year exams. In addition, these students require careful revision to see if they are exhibiting difficulty in their cultural transition. This is accomplished by continuous monitoring, and feedback of parents (tacking student progress through Skedula), teachers and peripheral staff members such as guidance counselors and deans to ensure that newcomer ENL's are adapting well to their new environment and are on track to reach their academic goals. c) ENL students receiving service for 4-6 years of our ENL program are supported in credit recovery for students nearing graduation that qualify as well as their content areas. ENL teachers work with student within their level of proficiency preparing them to exit the ENL program as Commanding and begin their transition. d) Our plan for long term (6+ years) ENL's is to continue to provide services with differentiated instruction in their classroom,based on the modalities in which they require the most support. They will also continue to receive support in all content areas. Teachers will continue to use informal and formal diagnostics to plan instruction and support student learning. Classroom teachers will also receive professional development on ENL approaches and strategies. e) Former ENLs will continue to receive support through Credit Recovery and content areas. Teachers will follow the same plan followed for long term ENLs to ensure the student can comfortably transition. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? HSMS provides the standards -aligned English Language Arts(ELA), Mathematics textbook and instructional materials, including materials for universal access . These programs are designed, implemented and documented to be in daily use in all classrooms for all students enrolled in grades 6-12 ELA and Mathematics courses. Full implementation means that all students, including English Language Learners (ELLs) , and Students With Disablities (SWDs) are provided the new CCLS-aligned textbooks and instructional materials 9-12 . ENL students use Empire State NYSESLAT grade 6-12 as well as HDH Collections grades 9-12 and CODE X 6-8. For Mathematics students are provided Algebra 1 grade 8-9 Common Core Pearson, Algebra 2 Common Core Pearson grade 10 and Geometry Common Core Pearson grade 11. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? HSMS teachers and school leaders work in collaboration to make decisions regarding curriculum and assessments. Activities are designed to ensure that students who have difficulty mastering the proficient or advanced levels in content areas are provided with effective timely additional assistance throughout the day and during push-in/pull-out periods. The additional assistance includes measures to ensure that students who are having difficulties are identified. Early programming considers availability of the ENL teacher to allow for access in her program. All classroom curricular/ instructional services are aligned with ENLs and ENLs with SWD with their IEPs, Common Core Learning Standards, and State and local requirements to ensure the education of ENL students in the new standardized assessments which will determine their progress to the next grade. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. At HSMS all certified teachers are used to working with ENLs to ensure that the amount of minutes mandated are met by providing support to all ENLs at all levels of proficiency (Entering/Emerging, Transitioning/Expanding, and Expanding*/Commanding level students) The following support structures or services are in place in our scool for ENLs: AIS, RTI and Credit Recovery. All programs made available to ENLs are offered in English. *Expanding student can test out if the same year they take NYSESLAT, they get a 3 or higher in the NYS ELA exam for grades 6-8 or a 65 and higher in the ELA Regents for grades 9-12. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? HSMS has welcomed the leadership program for grades 6-12 for Home Work help and Peer Tutoring as well as The Kaplan Program for grades for the High School students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 5  There will be no discontinuation of programs for ENLs at HSMS. The only changes that will be taking place is the exiting of students into monolingual programs after scoring proficient in the NYSESLAT. Once that has happened continued support will be provided to ensure students continue progressing. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All ENLs are programmed for AIS and or Credit Recovery based on their needs just as other students are programmed. The ultimate goal apart from becoming proficient in their language acquisition is to have them graduate with their cohort and to meet all CCLS in order to attend the college of their choice. Certified teacher are part of AIS and Credit Recovery as it is one of the single most critical element for successful learning for ENLs, SWDs and Monolingual students alike. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used with ENLs are Prentice Hall Literature, Empire State NYSESLAT, Scholastic, CODE X and Pearson Mathematics as well as Wordly Wise. Students have Lap tops within their classrooms to do research for all subjects (Lap tops are used to implement RTI programs as well as for AIS and Credit Recivery), Through the Danielsons Framework and the New School Net CCLS assessments teachers identify student needs and build on their curriculum with the data collected ( through the assessments now offered online through school net). This allows for differentiation at every level and subject area. RTI is used for progress monitoring ENLs & SWDs and it is implemented in all areas of instruction. HSMS is a print rich school. Students are given accounts to manage their class work and teachers set specific goals for each student. Every student works independently. Reading and Writing are emphasized in every subject and there is a writing component and use of technology in all content areas including physical education. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? The goals of ENL are to provide content area instruction in English using ENL methodology and instructional strategies as well as Native Language support to ensure comprehension. ENL instruction is based on literature and content based instruction that is aligned with the NYS CCLS. English is used to teach core content areas including Physical Education. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ENLs are grouped accordingly and have access to grade-appropriate content and language instruction through a highly qualified teacher. This is done because heterogeneous language grouping facilitates English language learning and it creates the need to use the English Language. Instructional strategies and support include balanced literacy like read aloud, shared reading, word walls, shared writing. critical thinking skills, independent reading and independent writing. Students learn how to distinguish between informational literacy and functional passages becoming familiar with the styles of questioning on the new NYS CCLS assessments. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used with ENLs are Prentice Hall Literature, Empire State NYSESLAT, Scholastic CODE X and Pearson Mathematics as well as Wordly Wise. Students have Lap tops within their classrooms to do research for all subjects (Lap tops are used to implement RTI programs as well as for AIS and Credit Recivery), Through the Danielsons Framework and the New School Net CCLS assessments teachers identify student needs and build on their curriculum with the data collected ( through the assessments now offered online through school net). This allows for differentiation at every level and subject area. RTI is used for progress monitoring ENLs & SWDs and it is implemented in all areas of instruction. HSMS is a print rich school. Students are given accounts to manage their class work and teachers set specific goals for each student. Every student works independently. Reading and Writing is emphasized in every subject and there is a writing component and use of technology in all content areas including physical education. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). 6  Activities for newly enrolled ENLs at HSMS include orientation, a tour of the campus as well as meeting with the staff to become familiar with the resources available to them while they are in the school, introduction to the Parent Coordinator as a contact for parents, as well as a questions and answer period to become familiar with their new teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? All students including ENLs are programmed for Spanish as a mandate for completing their required NYS two credit in a foreign language. Students on track for an advanced regents diploma must take six Spanish L.O.T.E courses in order to qualify for testing. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N / A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our teachers will continue to receive support in reciprocal teaching, data analysis, as well as planning aligned to the new Common Core Teaching Standards. We will continue to have formal/informal meetings between classroom teachers and inquiry teams to build on new teaching strategies in all content areas. Weekly professional development is provided to all staffs members. ENL teachers as well as NLA Teachers meet along with the ELA department to plan based on data collected from assessments. ENL teachers are sent to Network meetings to ensure that any new information is disseminated and received accordingly by teachers to support ELLs' progress. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. HSMS will continue to provide teachers with training for new ideas on strategies such as ( Danielsons Framework) for teaching and providing students with differentiated instruction. They will also continue to offer students support in AIS, Credit Recovery and RTI. They will continue to receive training in NYSESLAT test prep as well as ELA test prep in order to prepare the students for the New Common Core ELA and Intergrated Algebra Regents exams, RCTW & RCTR & the New Common Core NYS Reading and Math Exam for middle schoolers; as well as students who's IEP show declassification in grades 8 through 12 with a specification of safety net eligibility The ENL teacher provides additional ENL instruction during the 37 1/2 minutes Extended Day program to ENL students starting 1st period then teaches cluster periods throughout the day also providing service to ENLs through push-in and pull-out as well. 7  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Parental involvement in our school has continued to increase throughout the years. Having the help of our outstanding Parent Coordinator makes parent contact simple. We develop a relationship of trust with our parents that brings them in to participate on Saturday's for parent conferences as well as when a teacher is in need of a conference to discuss student progress and/ or concerns. The Pupil Personnel department along with the Parent Coordinator and attendance office work collaboratively to ensure that ENL students' parents do not feel separate or alienated from the monolingual parents. All conferences are translated and all documents are provided in students native language to ensure clear understanding of what is being discussed. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Through Parent Association meetings we meet with the Parent President and the Parent Coordinator which provide us with detailed lists of questions concerns and requests made by parents of monolingual and ENL students. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. All students in the school are trained to become resident experts in a topic of their choice, and ENL's are no exceptions. The concept of resident expert involves reading, writing, and presenting orally in front of their peers and staff, as well as in front of their invited guests during school wide celebrations. The NYS Science and NYS Social Studies section of Assessment and Analysis have not been filled out as our 8th grade students do not take these two exam as they take NYS Regents Exams in Living Environment and Integrated Algebra I CCLS. All other data pertaining to the present middle school and high school ENL's has been documented and included in the designated areas within the LAP. 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, William Quintana, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx High School for Medical School DBN: 09X413 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) William Quintana Title Principal Shirley Ithier Assistant Principal Antonio Melendez Parent Coordinator Illiannette Cirino ENL/Bilingual Teacher Erwin Serrano Parent Dilicia Florez Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Joseph Burgos School Counselor Michael Alcoff Socorro Diaz Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 10/30/18 10/30/18 10/30/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 09X413 School Name: The High School for Medical Science Superintendent: Michael Alcoff The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Antonio Joseph Melendez Burgos Parent Coordinator Yes Guidance Coordinator YES Yes YES * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. • HSMS looks at the existing ethnicity data in ATS reports ( RSSS & RHLA) for incoming students • The Parent Coordinator interacts with parents and keeps forms, informational guides, and the translation number for parent teacher conferences and Special Education (IEP) conferences in order to meet the language needs of parents/guardians 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 1  Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral N/A N/A N/A N/A • The predominant group needing translation services are Spanish speaking families. The Parent Coordinator and the PTA president play a major role in ensuring that parent are represented during the time when translation is needed. This is easily done within the school. Parents needing French, Arabic and other languages are provided with all necessary documentation, educational and major written communication translated by the Department of Education translation services department. All staff is made aware of translation services through Memos sent for Parent Teacher Conferences, and IEP Conferences, Disciplinary Conferences among other pertinent educational activities. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Spanish. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency How do you Distributed to plan to Families The school sends written documentation such as Orientation Letters, Senior Activities consent forms, parent handbooks, PTA notices, and Promotion in Doubt Letters. Documents which need translation into Sep-Jun translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translation software and official 2  languages other than Spanish sent to The Department of Education translation services. These documents are sent at various dates througouth the school year. translations from DOE. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school Parent -Teacher Conferences and Welcoming Night, College Nights, PA Meetings, and ASPIRA meetings. Sep-28 Nov-9 and 10. Mar-8 and 9. plan to provide interpretation service(s)? Bilingual Supporting Personnel. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. KINVOLVED App with multiple language translation. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. PD Day on Opening Day. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) 3  • A Large framed Poster sized sign is hanging on the third floor opposite the elevator for when parents/ guardians or visitors enter HSMS they see in English and the 8 languages that are required by the Chancellor’s Regulations saying welcome and informing them that translation services are available. Parents/ Guardians receive the Parent’s Bill of Rights in their Native Language as well as a copy of the Discipline Code and Parent Handbook. Translated documented and brochures are provided by the Department of Education and the school gets all important necessary school based documents translated. All Spanish translations are provided by staff members as needed. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? The Learning Environment Survey. 4 
