 10X447 School Name: CRESTON ACADEMY Principal: MELLISSA MILLER   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: CRESTON ACADEMY FOR RESPONSIBILITY AND EXCELLENCE 321000010447 6-8 School Number (DBN): 10X447 125 EAST 181 st STREET, BRONX, NY 10453 718) 367-5035 718) 367-5176 Phone Number: Fax: MellissaMiller mmiller3@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 10 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: MellissaMiller Rhonda Jackson RossySantana Mellissa Miller BarbaraMartinez NA NA NA District Information Maribel Hulla Superintendent: 1 FordhamPlaza Bronx, NY 10458 mhulla@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: (718)741-5852 Phone Number: 718)741-7098 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   BRONX FSC: Executive Director’s Office Address: Nancy Saffer Executive Director: ONE FORDHAM PLAZA, BRONX, NY 10458 nsaffer@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718)828-5643 Phone Number: (718)828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) MELLISSA MILLER RHONDA JACKSON RossySantana Gloria Morales Barbara Martinez NA NA NA Evelyn Roman Erin Thunell Fatima Ramirez *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher UFT Member/Teacher UFT Member/Parent   Name JaneenWilson TowanaRawlins Signature (Blue Ink) Position and Constituent Group Represented Member/ Parent of SE Student Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? The Creston Academy’s core belief is that education is the foundation of opportunity. Section 4: CEP Overview Together with our community stakeholders, Creston Academy provides a safe and nurturing environment that promotes responsibility, academic excellence, equity and social emotional awareness. Our future leaders are critical thinkers who will transform their lives, their communities and the world.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. The Creston Academy promotes the middle school environment that supports each student’s intellectual, ethical, emotional and physical development. The school is designed to foster and motivate a sense of belonging, mastery, independence and generosity in the lives of staff and students. Our school continues to partner with Good Shepherd Services to provide high quality expanded day (tutoring, STEM activities, sports, and instruction in the visual and performing arts after school programs) for 175 students. The Creston Academy also partners with Dreamyard through our CASA grant, to provide additional opportunities for students to engage in The Arts. For the past five years, we have partnered with Lincoln Center Education to provide instruction in visual and performing arts during the school day. Lincoln Center Teaching Artists push into our Social Studies Classes weekly to afford students opportunities to actively engage in instructional activities aligned to the Blueprint for Teaching and Learning in the Arts and the Social Studies Curriculum. Artists and teachers meet monthly to plan instructional activities that are engaging, rigorous, and common core aligned. Lincoln Center Education brings performances to our school, and students and parents are given the opportunity to visit Lincoln Center. Lincoln Center also arranges for our students to visit cultural institutions in the area such as The Metropolitan Museum and The Harlem Studio Museum. Urban Advantage is a partnership designed to foster and develop students’ love and understanding of STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) subjects through collaborations with science cultural institutions. Through this partnership, Creston Academy will have access to professional learning for teachers and administrators, classroom materials and equipment to facilitate scientific investigations and inquiry, field trips to support learning, building capacity through lead teacher development and schools serving as lab sites, collaborating and developing relationships through family events, celebrations of student achievement and workshops, and providing a variety of assessments. We are also a Teacher’s College Reading and Writing Project School. A Teacher’s College Staff Developer pushes into classrooms and demonstrates lessons in the teaching of reading and writing. The staff developer also meets with teachers and teacher teams to plan for the needs of all students including English Language Learners, Students with Disabilities, and the Bottom Third Achieving Students. Teachers attend monthly workshops at Teachers College and turnkey their learning to the rest of the staff. The Creston Academy is a Respect for All school. In partnership with the Anti-Defamation League, we have developed a strong anti-bullying policy that is implemented by the school’s three guidance counsellors and the dean. Guidance Counselors conduct advisories weekly in each class to prevent bullying. Our guidance counselors and the dean meet with students and the parents of the students who have been bullied and those who have been identified as bullies to ensure that the cycle is broken. 0  The Creston Academy is proud to be a Middle School College Access For All School. We have partnered with the Sports and Arts in Schools Foundation (SASF) in order to provide significant college awareness opportunities for 7th grade students. Students have participated in workshops and have visited colleges/universities including Yale University. The Creston Academy offers Specialized High School Achievement Test preparation to students in all grades from six to eight. Students may take Algebra I or Living Environment in the eighth grade. Students are identified by their New York State Math and/ or ELA Test scores, report card grades for seventh grade math and ELA, and by the recommendation of their teachers. Through C.H.A.M.P.S., we offer Girls Volleyball, Boys Volleyball, Flag Football, Flag Rugby. and Girls Softball. The Girls Volleyball Team were the Bronx champions in 2014 and went to place second in the New York City finals. In 2016 and 2017 our Girls Volleyball team placed first in New York City. Additional clubs include chess, debate, orchestra, yearbook and student council. The New York Road Runners make it possible for us to have a Young Runners Club. Students run in the after school program, from October to June and participate in citywide races. Our students were city champions in 2013 and 2014. Four of our students are Young Runner Ambassadors and represent the New York Road Runners in races such as the NYC marathon. For the past two years, two of our students have won scholarships for Running Camp in upstate New York. The Creston Academy celebrates academic success through its Achievement list and Principal’s list. Achievement list students obtain an average of 85 – 89 on their report cards, and Principal’s List students obtain an average of 90 and above. A celebration dinner, for those students and their parents, is given three times yearly with the issuance of report cards. Parents and students receive gifts to reward them for their effort and success. We also reward the most improved students as identified by their teachers. They receive an award for their effort. Our school’s strengths include teacher collaboration and leadership through Teacher Teams, inclusion of students with special needs through integrated co-teaching classes, small group instruction, differentiated instruction, systems of student management, and strong relationships with parents. The Creston Academy has a Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best. These are: Differentiation: Provision of Appropriately Challenging Tasks: Supports/Extensions Student Engagement: Higher Order Thinking Skills; Rigor Actionable Feedback to Students; Annual and Interim Goals 1  Explicit Modeling; Teaching; Classroom Teaching Strategies and Routines The Peer Collaborative Teacher, Model Teachers, and Literacy Coach support the teachers in all aspects of the Danielson Framework. Teachers are encouraged to attend professional development provided by Teacher’s College, The Field Support Center, and Lincoln Center at various times during the year. Teachers who attend, then turnkey the information they have received during professional development. Our teachers and staff are the backbone of the Creston Academy, and their ideas are listened to and treated with respect. Our teachers know that they are an essential part of our community. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. English Language Learners Thirty-three percent of our students are English Language Learners. Virtually all of those students are Spanish speaking. Those students are in our TBE program or general education classes for English Language Learners. They receive home language support in their academic subjects, and are immersed in English to develop language and communication skills. They receive instruction in Spanish according to their placement of the Lab R and the NYSESLAT. We currently have 4 full time ENL teachers to meet the needs of all of our English Language Learners and Former ELLs. Eleven of our students are long term ELLs. These are students who are receiving seven or more years of service. These students need intensive small group and one on one support. They need remedial programs to address the skills they are lacking that prevent them from becoming Commanding in English. Twenty six of our ELLs also are Students With Disabilities. These students need intensive support and Academic Intervention Services. They are in ICT classes with a Special Education Teacher and an ENL teacher to support them. Sixteen percent of our students are students with Disabilities. They need academic and emotional support from teachers, special education teachers, paraprofessionals, and service providers. All of our service providers push into classes when possible to provide support in the classroom so our students can achieve the Common Core Learning Standards. We provide all services in the least restrictive setting. When indicated, student are pulled out and individual needs are addressed. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. The Creston Academy made the most progress in the area of rigorous instruction. According to our school quality guide, this area has increased steadily over the past three years. This is can be attributed to strong Curricula and teacher collaboration. 2  This year the key focus, per the framework, is on strong family-community ties and trust. Although both of these areas are well above the city average, we will take into account survey responses to get parents, families and outside organizations more involved in order to improve the academic and social/emotional well-being of our students. 3  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 10X447 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 460 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual YES Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 1 1 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 5 2 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 92.0% % Attendance Rate 91.1% % Reduced Lunch 35.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 86.5% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 1.3% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 3.26 0% 35% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 33.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A NO N/A YES NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 101 102 93.3% 1.1% 18.3% 9.8% 1.5% 0.9% 2 35% 6.7 26.6% 41% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A NO NO NO N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Areas of Celebration The school leader adeptly triangulates between goal setting, high expectations and progress monitoring. She uses data points both qualitative (tiered student work products) and quantitative (growth percentile and proficiency analysis, ELA and math June instructional reports and items analysis) in an embedded system with indicators of success to evaluate the systems for improvements, uses findings to communicate examples of strength, areas of need and clear next steps for adjustments to track student learning. The school leader believes and articulates that all students can achieve at high levels. The school leader’s ambitious goals are aligned to a sense of urgency regarding her philosophy of “our kids deserve more”. (3.1; 3.4; 5.1) PPO#1 2017/2018 1.1 and 1.2 During our observations, discussion and in looking at lesson plans, it was evident that you have strategically addressed multiple entry points and student engagement. It is apparent that your leadership and support to teachers in understanding the DOK levels of questioning manifested in the strategic implementation of Advanced Literacy skills and in class and small group instruction and discussion. Your focus in strengthening the instructional core through Teachers College curriculum is infused in every classroom so that all learners, including SWDs and ELLs, are provided with access to high quality reading and writing activities. PPO#2 2017/2018 Students increased 6.9 percentage points on the New York State 2018 ELA Assessment and increased 6.4 percentage points on the 2018 New York State Math Assessment. Needs: "Areas of Focus and Next Steps As discussed, the school leader will continue to focus efforts in identifying and defining the gaps between instruction and assessment as well as how to vertically track student growth between 6th and terminal grades. Formalized “checks for understanding” that is documented will be able to help track individual student understanding in lessons and activities." PPO #1 2017.2018 5  1.1; `1.2 "It is apparent that your leadership and support to teachers in understanding the DOK levels of questioning manifested in the strategic implementation of Advanced Literacy skills and in class and small group instruction and discussion." PPO #2 2017-2018 ' 1.2; 2.2 "Continue to refine and enhance programs such as ENL supports (Adv Lit) and ENL programming, continue to develop school specific AIS programs and continue building a strong teacher leadership program." PPO #1 2017-2018 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, all students will engage in ambitious conferences that include asking and answering high level questions based on feedback from teacher, peers and self-assessment. This will result in the ability to answer higher level questions, resulting in a 5% increase on the New York State English Language Arts exam and the New York State Math Assessment. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All teachers will meet weekly in Teacher Teams to collaboratively plan instructional next steps to differentiate the Common Core Learning, Standards-aligned curricula to meet the precise needs of subgroups of students and support their access into the rigorous texts of Common Core Curricula. Supervisors will expect and emphasize the best pedagogical practices of the School’s Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best as well as our new instructional focus around ambitious conferences, as well as performances on Danielson components 3b and 3d. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers Literacy Coach Assistant principals Principal Principal Assistant principals All teachers, including subgroups of teachers such as new teachers and teachers preparing for tenure. All teachers, including subgroups of teachers such as new teachers and teachers preparing for tenure. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, the bottom 1/3 and Students on and above grade level. Teacher Teams meet weekly during designated and calendarized schedules, beginning in October 2018 and ending in June 2019. September 2018: Supervisors will conduct initial planning conferences October 2018 - May 2018 pre and post observation conferences, to provide feedback to teachers, and provide ratings for all classroom observations, and ending in June 2019. Professional Learning time will involve teacher planning in order to better implement Teacher’s College Curriculum and Eureka Math Curriculum. All teachers, including subgroups of teachers Beginning in September 2018 and ending June Principal 7  Professional Development opportunities will include focus and emphasis on assessment and feedback strategies for appropriately meeting the needs of diverse learners. such as new teachers and teachers preparing for tenure. All teachers, including subgroups of teachers such as new teachers and teachers preparing for tenure. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, the bottom 1/3 and Students on and above grade level. Assistant principals Literacy Coach Math Coach Model Teachers 2019 ongoing supervisory review and rating of lesson plans as applicable to observations, as part of the ADVANCE Evaluation System. Professional Principal learning cycles and planning meetings will be provided to teachers to address all components from the school's instructional Assistant principal Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers Literacy Coach Teachers College Staff Developer MSQI Coach focus beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019. Teachers College Coach: 9/21, 10/17, 10/24, 10/26/ 11/13, 11/19, 12/4, 12/7, 1/11, 1/24/ 2/12, 2/27, 3/5, 4/11, 4/16, 5/10 8  MSQI Coach: 9/18, 10/9, 10/25, 11/9, 11/19, 12/4, 12/20, 1/18, 1/29, 2/11, 3/7, 3/21, 4/9, 5/23, 6/1 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the Curriculum and instructional expectations during the September 2018 Parent Teacher conference. All teachers will discuss the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, the Criteria for Success for each academic subject, and the assessments their students will be required to takes. Beginning in September of 2018, and continuing monthly until June of 2019, the parent coordinator will offer weekly workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, and awareness of the Next Generation Learning Standards. Our online gradebook allows parents to log on to the site to view their students' grades, homework, and assessments. Workshops will include how to access MYON, Newsela, Rosetta Stone, IXL learning, and eScience from home to support student learning. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Creston Academy has a Coherent Set of Beliefs about How Students Learn Best. All professional development provided by Peer Collaborative Teachers, Model Teachers, Teachers College Staff Developer and Mentors will emphasize the components of our beliefs. Instructional resources including the Teachers College curriculum, Eureka Math (EngageNY), Passport to Social Studies and Foss Science will include strategies which address the needs of diverse learners. Resources include: Peer Collaborative Teachers, Model Teachers, Literacy Coach, Teachers College Staff Developer, Teachers College workshops, MSQI Coach, Myon Learning, leveled libraries, and IXL Math, escience, News ELA Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Supervisory Review and Rating of teachers’ lesson plans as applicable to observations, as part of the ADVANCE Evaluation System, using the Danielson Framework For Teaching Rubrics, Domain 1 Planning and Preparation 9  components. Bu the end of the second observation cycle in January of 2019, 95% of teachers will be effective or highly effective in Domain 1. 2. Classroom supervisory observations will document teachers’ implementation of scaffolding strategies to support subgroup populations, embedded in Common Core Learning Standards-aligned curricula. By January of 2019, 95% of teachers will include differentiated lesson plans for at least one subgroup. 3. Documentation Forms have been developed for teachers to complete and submit to the Principal after each Teacher Team meeting to evaluate effectiveness of the content and processes of the Teacher Teams. All teacher teams will submit documentation of two inquiry cycles by January of 2019. 4. Classroom supervisory observations, pre and post conferences with teachers, and feedback to teachers will document teachers’ implementation of scaffolding strategies to support subgroup populations, embedded in Common Core Learning Standards-aligned curricula. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Conference Logs, Informal and Formal Observation. Scholastic Reading Inventory, DRP, Engage New York Mathematics Assessments. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? Strengths: 1.4 The culture in your school community is imbued with mutual trust and communal positivity around student personal and academic growth. You provide a model for your school community as you exemplify what it means to instill a culture of respect and trust. Your collaborations with staff, families and students reflects your commitment to articulated goals, beliefs, and are reflective of your participation in the work we are doing around social emotion learning. You further support the school vision and student needs through an array of partnerships that promotes a positive learning environment for the entire school community. PPO #2 2017-2018 Needs: Our school supports and sustains social and emotional growth through our core belief that each student is a valued member of the community and can develop and progress to his/her full potential given a safe, risk free environment where he is nurtured and respected. We have two guidance counselors and a dean to support students and parents. Provide more parents with the skills to support students socially and emotionally. we will empower the student council to be an active advocate for their peers. We will encourage more parents to actively participate in the school leadership team in order to make decisions that are best for our students' social and emotional well-being. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, The School Leadership Team and Guidance Team will meet regularly to collaboratively make decisions that support student achievement and social emotional well-being. This will result in a 5% decrease in the number of incidents in OORs. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). The school Dean, school Guidance Counselors, and Parent Coordinator meet regularly with students and families, throughout the year to track monitor and proactively support students’ social and emotional growth. All students, in particular academically and behaviorally at risk students. The parent coordinator facilitates weekly workshops with parents. The dean and guidance counselors meet two day per week after school with students and their families, teachers, and other relevant staff members. Students participate in Student Council Meetings to plan and enact activities responding to the social and emotional needs of students including Respect for All Week, Acts of Kindness, School Dances, and Student Achievement Celebrations. All students, in particular academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/achievement. Dean, Guidance Counselors, Community Based Organizations, Parent Coordinator Teacher who serves as Student Council Advisor. Beginning October 2018 and ending in June 2019, daily interactions between school personnel, students and families, with communication occurring frequently and on an ongoing, as needed basis. Dean, Guidance Counselors, Community Based organizations, Parent Coordinator meet with students and families. Student Council will meet on the following Saturdays: 10/20/18, 10/27/18, 11/3/18, 11/17/18, 2  12/1/18, 1/5/19, 1/12/19, 2/2/19, 2/9/19, 3/2/19, 3/16/19, 4/6/19, 4/13/19, 5/4/19, 5/11/19, 6/1/19, Student Council will plan and implement student-led activities throughout the year. Weekly meetings beginning October 11, 2018 and ending May 22, 2019. Know your Classmates Day, October 26. No One Eats Alone Day : 2/15/19. Be Kind Online Day: 4/18/19 Beginning in September of 2018 and ending in June 2019.. Beginning October 2018 and ending June 2019, after-school programs meet daily. The SLT will meet on the following dates: 9/18/18, Teacher Advisor Dean Guidance Counselors Good Shepherd Services staff and staff from other CBOs, as well as school staff School Leadership Team. Students Participate in Beyond Differences Activities to end social isolation in school. Student Leaders meet weekly to plan activities for Know Your Classmates Day, No One Eats Alone Day and Be Kind Online Day. Ten Student Leaders to plan activities. All students participate in celebration activities. Guidance Counselors conduct weekly advisories in all classes so students can discuss personal and social problems and share their concerns. All Students. Community-Based Organizations, such as Good Shepherd Services, provide grants to school and services to children and families. Tehy collaborate with school personnel, including but not limited to, the principal and teachers. 200 student chosen based on applications. Teachers and parents participate in the School Leadership Team committees and subcommittees to address issues of safety. Entire school community, including students, parents, teachers and staff. 3  9/25/18, 10/9/18, 10/23/18, 11/20/18, 11/27/18, 12/4/18, 12/18/18, 1/8/19, 1/22/19, 2/12/19, 2/26/19, 2/12/19, 3/26/19, 4/9/19, 4/30/19, 5/7/19, 5/21/19, June TBD Subcommittee meetings will be haeld as needed throughout the year such as to obtain the DOE required waiver for the Algebra Regents and to create the SCEP. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of Creston Academy's Coherent Set of Beliefs about How Children Learn Best, and how they promote a Supportive Environment- during the September 2018 Parent Teacher conference. All teachers will discuss the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, the Criteria for Success for each academic subject, and the assessments their students will be required to takes. Beginning in September of 2018, and continuing monthly until June of 2019, the parent coordinator will offer weekly workshops on the Common Core Learning/Next Generation Standards, and our online grade book. Our online grade book allows parents to log on to the site to view their students' grades, homework, and assessments. Workshops will include how to access NewsELA, Rosetta Stone, IXL learning, and eScience from home to support student learning. The Parent Coordinator will conduct workshops in multiple intelligences as well as Respect for All and Anti-bullying. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 4  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We believe student progress is directly impacted by the culture of the school. Student progress to their highest potential when they are in a safe, supportive environment that is responsive to their social and emotional needs. To this end, we have budgeted for a guidance counselor on each grade, and a dean. They meet with parents and students during the day, after school, and on Saturdays. We have a student council that meets on Saturdays and during lunch so that our students become forceful stakeholders in their education. Resources:  Two Guidance Counselors  Dean  Guidance Counselor per session  Dean per session  Teacher advisor for student council  Beyond Differences program and curriculum Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Suspension rates, detention logs, OORs reports, accident reports, attendance reports will reflect improved student social-emotional growth. There will be a 5% decrease in OORS reports and Suspension Rates by February of 2019, and a 5% decrease by June of 2019. 2. Student surveys will be conducted to evaluate the effectiveness and impact of the social, emotional programs offered by the school, two times during the year, starting in January 2019 and at the end of year, June 2019. 3. Mid-year and end of year program evaluation reports will reflect students’ emotional and social growth throughout the year. 4. School Learning Environment survey, Spring 2019 will reflect a 5% increase of staff and parent increases in responses of strongly agree in relation to questions of communication, engagement and safety. There will be a 2% increase in attendance as evidenced by school's overall attendance percentage. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs reports, accident reports, attendance reports, student surveys and School Learning Environment Survey. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths Parents and student interviewed consider themselves “lucky” to be a member of this school community. The school leader ensures that the school is safe and nurturing and singularly focused towards college and career readiness goals. A parent said, “It’s like being in a Charter school”. High expectations and appropriate scaffolds are woven within the school-wide systems and structures. Resources are allocated and managed both physical and human to optimize student outputs. Classroom visits found paraprofessionals working with small groups of students and mentor teachers pushing into new teacher classrooms. Collaboration is key to her strategy of embedding best practices and data dives during team meetings. Team meetings couched in Collaborative Inquiry is scheduled and adhered to promote group lens in data dives and integrating the use of protocols (Consultancy protocol- looking at tiered groups of student work). (1.3; 1.4, 4.2) PPO#1 2017/2018 1.4 The culture in your school community is imbued with mutual trust and communal positivity around student personal and academic growth. You provide a model for your school community as you exemplify what it means to instill a culture of respect and trust. Your collaborations with staff, families and students reflects your commitment to articulated goals, beliefs, and are reflective of your participation in the work we are doing around social emotion learning. You further support the school vision and student needs through an array of partnerships that promotes a positive learning environment for the entire school community PPO #2 2017/2018. Needs 4.2 Building on the structured professional collaborations and distributive leadership of teachers, continue to provide opportunities for all teacher teams to systematically engage in collaborative inquiry with targeted professional development around Advanced Literacy to deepen your work around data-driven improvement cycles. PPO #2 2017/2018 Next steps: Drawing on already well-established structures for teacher teams and professional learning. Guide all teachers in better understanding of inquiry work and for teams to analyze the impact on student learning for identified groups of learners in cycles of 6-8 weeks. Track how Advanced Literacy skills and strategies are supporting identified groups of learners and making academic gains. PPO#2 2017/2018 Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified 6  priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 100% of teachers will collaboratively analyze student work weekly and identify specific instructional supports for students including English Language Learner, Students with Disabilities and students scoring in the bottom 1/3 resulting in a 5% increase on the New York State Mathematics Exam. 7  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  All Teacher Teams (Grades and Content Areas) will evaluate student work/assessments weekly, using a prescribed protocol for Looking at Student Work and Common Core Learning Standards-aligned RUBRICS. Teachers will meet to share best instructional practices. Teachers will use the Inquiry process to identify the strengths and needs of students, and use that process to devise instruction tailored to the needs of all students including ELLS, SWDs. the bottom third of performing students. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and the bottom 1/3 Supervisors will review and analyze the documentation forms submitted by the Teacher Teams, on a weekly basis, to determine the effectiveness of the Teacher Teams and their growing capacity to rigorously evaluate student work products and make appropriate and effective next instructional steps to improve student performance. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners and the bottom 1/3. Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Literacy Coach Math Coach Teachers College Staff Developer Principal Assistant principals Teacher Team meetings begin In October, 2018, and are conducted weekly, according to the school’s year-long calendar In addition to Teacher leaders on each grade, all Teacher Teams will collaboratively Look at Student Work, 3 times per month and collaboratively meet to Share Best Instructional Practices. Supervisors will collect and review documentation forms submitted by Teacher Teams on a weekly basis, starting in October, 2018 and 8  All teachers will participate in professional development workshops that focus on best practices of using assessment in instruction and providing effective feedback to students, using Common Core Learning Standards Rubrics (Danielson Framework for Teaching component 3D-Assessment in Instruction). All Teacher Teams will revise their lesson plans monthly to create highly effective lessons, as per the Danielson Framework For Teaching components 1a and 1e, using the evidence of student work to make modifications and revisions, to meet the learning needs of the diverse subgroups in the classrooms. Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, the bottom 1/3 and Students on and above grade level Students with Disabilities, English Language Learners, the bottom 1/3 and Students on and above grade level. Peer Collaborative Teacher Model Teachers Literacy Coach Teachers College Staff Developer MSQI Coach Assistant principals Principal Peer Collaborative Teachers Model Teachers Literacy Coach Math Coach Teachers College Staff Developer MSQI Coach Principal Assistant principals ending in June, 2019. Beginning in September, 2018, Professional Development workshops will be provided weekly; Professional development will be provided during designated preparation periods for targeted teachers, ending in June, 2019. Beginning in September, 2018, Teacher Teams will meet to collaboratively develop a Highly Effective lesson plan each month, ending in June, 2019. All teachers, with support of coaches, teacher leaders and consultants will write a minimum of 4 highly effective lessons, as per the Danielson Framework For Teaching, 9  using student work to drive instructional decisions to meet the diverse learning needs of subgroup populations, such as ELLs and SWDs. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the Curriculum and instructional expectations during the September 2018 Parent Teacher conference. All teachers will discuss the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, the Criteria for Success for each academic subject, and the assessments their students will be required to takes. Beginning in September of 2018, and continuing monthly until June of 2019, the parent coordinator will offer weekly workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, and Engrade. Engrade allows parents to log on to the site to view their students' grades, homework, and assessments. Workshops will include how to access Newsela, Rosetta Stone, IXL learning, and eScience from home to support student learning. Teachers and/or teacher teams will meet with parents on Tuesdays from 2:20 to 3:00 beginning in September of 2018 and continuing through June of 2019. In these meetings, teachers will give parents strategies and resources to support their children at home. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. The Creston Academy has incorporated the following common preparation periods for teacher teams to examine and analyze data, and adjust instruction with special emphasis on ELLs, SWDs, and the bottom third performing students:  Grade 6 ELA  Grade 7 ELA  Grade 8 ELA  Grade 6 Math  Grade 7 Math  Grade 8 Math Social Studies  Science   Physical Education Peer Collaborative Teacher will lead professional development on Monday afternoons with assistance from the model teachers. A Teachers College staff developer will assist ELA and Social Studies teachers in planning and providing instruction for all students including ELLs, SWDs, and the bottom third performing students. District Public will collate and analyze data from state and local assessments and provide professional development to teachers so teachers can use the data to facilitate maximum student progress. 0  Resources:  Teacher Teams  Peer Collaborative Teacher  Model Teachers Literacy Coach   Data Specialist  Teachers College Staff Developer  District Public  Common Preparation Periods Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. Documentation forms have been developed for teachers to complete and submit to the principal after each weekly, Teacher Team meeting to evaluate effectiveness of the content and processes of weekly Teacher Teams. By January 31 of 2019, written evidence of four Inquiry Cycles including student work, analysis of that work, strategies design to address student need, and assessments. 2. Teacher reflection forms will be implemented after each Professional Development workshop to determine the effectiveness of the PD provided. . 3. Lesson plans and classroom observations will reflect levels of performance, as rated by the Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. At the end of each observation cycle, (October 31, December 12, February 28, May 7) the principal will analyze the strengths and weaknesses of teacher lesson plans, and meet with the teacher leaders to plan professional development to meet the needs of all teachers. 4. Assessment results from: Teacher’s College Common Core on Demand Writing Tasks, SRI, Math baseline, and Common Core Tasks. Benchmarks for these assessments will be October 2018 and May 2019. 5. Monthly workshop in Common Core Standards will be given by the parent coordinator to explain the standards and how the school is implementing them in all content areas. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Documentation forms, Teacher reflection forms, Lesson plans, ADVANCE reports, assessment results. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths The school leader adeptly triangulates between goal setting, high expectations and progress monitoring. She uses data points both qualitative (tiered student work products) and quantitative (growth percentile and proficiency analysis, ELA and math June instructional reports and items analysis) in an embedded system with indicators of success to evaluate the systems for improvements, uses findings to communicate examples of strength, areas of need and clear next steps for adjustments to track student learning. The school leader believes and articulates that all students can achieve at high levels. The school leader’s ambitious goals are aligned to a sense of urgency regarding her philosophy of “our kids deserve more”. (3.1; 3.4; 5.1) PPO #1 2017/2018 1.1 and 1.2 During our observations, discussion and in looking at lesson plans, it was evident that you have strategically addressed multiple entry points and student engagement. It is apparent that your leadership and support to teachers in understanding the DOK levels of questioning manifested in the strategic implementation of Advanced Literacy skills and in class and small group instruction and discussion. Your focus in strengthening the instructional core through Teachers College curriculum is infused in every classroom so that all learners, including SWDs and ELLs, are provided with access to high quality reading and writing activities. PPO #2 2017/2018 Needs: Next steps: Drawing on already well-established structures for teacher teams and professional learning. Guide all teachers in better understanding of inquiry work and for teams to analyze the impact on student learning for identified groups of learners in cycles of 6-8 weeks. Track how Advanced Literacy skills and strategies are supporting identified groups of learners and making academic gains. school supports and sustains social and emotional growth through our core belief that each student is a valued member of the community and can develop and progress to his/her full potential given a safe, risk free environment where he is nurtured and respected. We have two guidance counselors and a dean to support students and parents. Our goal is to provide more parents with the skills to support students socially and emotionally. We will empower the student council to be an active advocate for their peers. We will encourage more parents to actively participate in the school leadership team in order to make decisions that are best for our students’ social and emotional well-being. PPO #2 2017/2018 Part 2 – Annual Goal 2  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 100 percent of teachers will receive frequent verbal and written feedback from supervisors, based on the Danielson Framework for Teaching. There will be a specific focus on teachers' pedagogical goals as well as goals for improving student outcomes for all students, including subgroups of students. This will result in a 5 percent increase in the number of teachers receiving effective or highly effective in 3d of the Danielson Framework: Using Assessment in Instruction. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including: Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy?  Evidence-based instructional programs,  professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). A minimum number of frequent classroom observations, using Charlotte Danielson's Framework for Teaching and adhering to the guidelines of the ADVANCE Evaluation System, with feedback provided to all teachers within 2 weeks. Peer Collaborative Teachers, Literacy Coach, Assistant Principals, Principal All teacher, including subgroups of teachers such as new teachers and teachers preparing for tenure. September 2019: Initial Planning Conferences with all teachers. October 2018-May 2019 Classroom Observations June 2019: End of Year Conferences. Beginning in October Principal, Assistant Principals, Per Collaborative Teachers, and Coaches will meet with teachers to support their implementation of ADVANCE requirements and Danielson Framework for Teaching Rubric. 4  Students participate in Student Council Meetings to plan and enact activities responding to the social and emotional needs of students including Respect for All Week, Acts of Kindness Wall, School Dances, and Student Achievement Celebrations. All students, in particular academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/ achievement. Beginning October 2018 and ending in June 2019, Student Council meets twice monthly to plan and implement student-led activities throughout the year. Guidance counselors conduct weekly advisories in all classes so students can discuss personal and social problems and share their concerns. All Students Community-Based Organizations, such as Good Shepherd Services, provide grants to school and services to children and families. They collaborate with school personnel, including but not limited to, the principal and teachers. 200 students chosen based on applications. Teacher who serves as Student Council Advisor. Guidance Counselors Beginning September 2018 and ending June 2019. Beginning October 2018 and ending in June 2019, after-school programs meet daily. Good Shepherd Services staff and staff from other CBOs, as well as school staff, provide after-school programs. Teachers and parents participate in the School Leadership Team committees and subcommittees to address issues of safety. School Leadership Team Entire school community, including students, parents, teachers and staff. Beginning September 2018 and ending in June 2019, School Leadership Team meets monthly, with subcommittee meetings as needed throughout the year such as to obtain DOE required waiver for Algebra or to create the SCEP. 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 5  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Parents will be informed of the Curriculum and instructional expectations during the September 2018 Parent Teacher conference. All teachers will discuss the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards, the Criteria for Success for each academic subject, and the assessments their students will be required to takes. Beginning in September of 2017, and continuing monthly until June of 2018, the parent coordinator will offer weekly workshops on the Common Core Learning Standards, and our online grade book. Our online grade book allows parents to log on to the site to view their students' grades, homework, and assessments. Workshops will include how to access Newsela, Rosetta Stone, IXL learning, and eScience from home to support student learning. The School Leadership Team will meet twice monthly and the minutes will be available in the main office. Parents will be informed of all safety issues and new programs by robocall, backpack letters, or both. The Dean and guidance counsellors will meet with parents and students to address safety and academic issues related to individual students. Parents will be invited into the building to partner with us for the benefit of our students.. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Use of the ADVANCE Evaluation System to provide written feedback to teachers. Schedules will be created to include time for new teachers to meet with their Peer Instructional Coaches that will serve as mentors and attend demonstration lessons. The School’s Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best, CCL and Next Generation Learning Standards and Common Core Curricula will be used as the basis of all pre and post observation discussions. Peer Collaborative teachers will meet with teachers weekly to support their implementation of ADVANCE requirements. PCT will provide professional development and support to teachers, especially new and non-tenured teachers during preparation periods. Our PCT has an abbreviated schedule. The remainder of the day designated as teacher support periods. Model Teachers will open their classrooms to all teachers and model effective teaching practices. New teachers are scheduled to visit a Model teacher each week to fulfill their mentoring requirement. The Literacy Coach will support all ELA teachers in the implementation of the Danielson Framework component 3D in ELA classrooms. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1. All teachers will receive feedback and reports connected to the minimum number of observations, according to their selected observation options in October of 2018, and January and June of 2019. 6  2. Self-reflections will be used both prior to and post each observation to measure the alignment between teachers’ goals, student achievement, and observed practice. At least 50% of teachers will demonstrate alignment by October of 2018, and 75% by June of 2019. 3. 50% of lessons observed will increase their HEDI rating in 3D from original lessons observed and subsequent lessons observed. 4. Agendas, minutes, and documentation forms from teacher team meetings will reflect teachers’ expertise in assessments of Common Core Learning Standard curricula, instructional practices, and student work with appropriate implications and plans for next instructional steps to support improved student outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Teachers’ goals, Advance reports, agendas, minutes, and documentation forms from teacher team meeting. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Strengths: Parents and student interviewed consider themselves “lucky” to be a member of this school community. The school leader ensures that the school is safe and nurturing and singularly focused towards college and career readiness goals. A parent said, “It’s like being in a Charter school”. High expectations and appropriate scaffolds are woven within the school-wide systems and structures. Resources are allocated and managed both physical and human to optimize student outputs. PPO #1 2017/2018 1.4 The culture in your school community is imbued with mutual trust and communal positivity around student personal and academic growth. You provide a model for your school community as you exemplify what it means to instill a culture of respect and trust. Your collaborations with staff, families and students reflects your commitment to articulated goals, beliefs, and are reflective of your participation in the work we are doing around social emotion learning. You further support the school vision and student needs through an array of partnerships that promotes a positive learning environment for the entire school community. PPO #1 2017/2018 Needs: We will continue to improve student outcomes and performance by reaching out to more parents and providing a welcoming environment so that parents and families will know they are partners in their children’s progress. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, parents and families will receive increased opportunities to engage in activities in school, resulting in a 5% increase in the number of parents who respond strongly agree to questions related to communication on the Spring 2019 New York City School Survey. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH).  Student grades will be posted regularly on Engrade, an online for parents to track their children’s progress and performance, in real time. Parent workshops will be conducted throughout the year, focusing on diverse needs of the community and its constituents. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Principal Assistant principal Teacher Leaders Tech Liaison Parent Coordinator Data Specialist Parent Coordinator Tech Liaison Data Specialist Parents of all students, including academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/ achievement, Students With Disabilities and ELLs Parents of all students, including academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/ achievement, Students With Disabilities and ELLs. Teachers enter student performance data online, using Engrade. Parents connect to Engrade to view their children’s progress and performance. Beginning in September 2018 and ending in June 2019, Parent Coordinator will plan and implement monthly parent workshops. Parent Coordinator plans and implements parent workshops related to issues of concern to parents and families, 9  Common Core Learning Standards with examples of student work aligned to the standards will be shared with parents throughout the year NYC Schools Account will be monitored to track the number of parents who are using the resource through the Family Access Management tool. Parent Coordinator Content Area Teachers Tech Liaison Data Specialist Testing Coordinator Data Specialist Parent Coordinator leading to improved student progress and performance, leading to College and Career Readiness. Teachers will share examples of students’ CCLS work at all four Parent-Teacher conferences, during Fall 2018 and Spring 2019 and at various times throughout the year, as needed. Teachers will share students’ CCLS work with parents. Beginning in October, 2018 and ending in June, 2019, Testing Coordinator, Data Specialist and Parent Coordinator will monitor NYC Schools Account through the Family Access Management tool. Parents of all students, including academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/ achievement, Students With Disabilities and ELLs.at risk students and Parents of all students, including academically and behaviorally, at risk students and students who have shown continuous improvement/ achievement, Students With Disabilities and ELLs. 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Good Shepherd Services Lincoln Center Education Doing Art Together Urban Advantage Education Through Music Dreamyard Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Our parent coordinator in conjunction with the Parent Association will conduct weekly workshops for parents. These workshops will include, Engrade, Common Core Learning Standards. We will also conduct workshop for parents of English Language Learners and parent of Students With Disabilities. We use the online gradebook to inform parents of their students’ progress in all subject areas. The resources are:  Engrade  Parent Coordinator  Tech Liaison  Testing Coordinator   District public School Leadership Team Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind X X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. 1.There will be a 5% Increase in percentage of parents using Engrade online site by January of 2019 2. Parents’ responses on school’s Spring 2018 Learning Environment Survey will reflect strongly agree with questions related to communication and data. 1  3. Percentage of parents attending Parent-Teacher conferences will increase five percent from previous year, as measured by parent sign-in sheets. By February of 2019 4.There will be a five percent Increase in percentage of parents using NYC Schools Account online by January of 2019 Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Engrade data reports,Learning Environment Survey, Parent-Teacher conference logs, and NYC Schools Account data. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 2  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small Group, one-to-one During School, After School MYON Bookshare Rosetta Stone Guided Reading Wilson Great Leaps After school tutoring One-to-one Small Group Small Group One-to-one Small Group Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) One or Two on ELA exam Below level on SRI/DRP Insufficient progress in coursework During School, After School During School, After School During School, After School During School, After School After School During School, After School During School, After School During School Mathematics One or Two on NYS exam Guided Math Small Group Fast Math Small Group Below level on Math Baseline Insufficient progress in coursework IXL Small Group, One-to one After school tutoring Small Group After school Science Below level on diagnostic Guided Reading with Content Area Texts Small Group During School 3 Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Insufficient progress in coursework Below level on diagnostic Insufficient progress in coursework Excessive absences and/or lateness Insufficient academic progress Teacher recommendation Suspensions E-Science Small Group During School Guided Reading with Content Area Texts Small Group During School MYON Small Group During School Life Skills Curriculum Whole Class, Small Group, One-to One During School Second Step Drug Prevention Whole Class, Small Group, One-to-One NYU Understanding Disproportionality Small Group Anti – Defamation League’s No Place to Hate Initiative Whole Class, Small Group During School, After School During School During School, After School 4  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 83 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. In addition to services provided to all students, Students in Temporary housing will have access to, including but not limited counseling and extracurricular activities. Students in temporary housing will receive additional school uniforms, books, backpacks, supplies and care packages containing toiletries and other necessities. Students in Temporary Housing will have access to the following intervention programs and curriculum supports: Myon, News ELA, eScience, Rosetta Stone, Fast Math. In addition students will be offered addition support in Saturday and after school academies. Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 5  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 6  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Ninety-five percent of our teachers are highly qualified. We employ a rigorous outreach and interview process at our school. We collaborate with Teach for America, The New York Teaching Fellows and the Department of Education Teacher Recruitment Office to interview and hire highly qualified teachers for vacancies as they occur. Qualified applicants are interviewed by a team of teachers (The interview committee. Candidates judged suitable are then interviewed by the principal. Teachers that are hired are invited to attend professional development during the summer they will receive curriculum maps, pacing calendars, and curriculum materials. During this week they will receive training in Advance including Danielson Framework for Teaching, Measures of Student Learning, and Observation choices. Each new teacher is assigned the Literacy Coach or a Peer Collaborative Teacher as a mentor. The mentor meets with the new teacher twice weekly to discuss what is working well, areas of concern, and next steps through the lens of the Danielson Framework. New teachers visit the classroom of Model Teachers weekly to observe best practices. These observation periods are embedded in their schedules. Professional Development is provided by the Peer Collaborative Teacher weekly on Monday afternoons. Provides professional development in reading and writing IEPs and navigating SESIS. Teachers College coaches provide professional development in the workshop model, reading and writing, and data analysis. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Teacher growth is supported through specific, low inference, evidence-based feedback from the principal, assistant principal. Monthly one-on-one meetings with teachers focus on the attainment of their professional goals and the school support needed to achieve the goals. 7  Professional Development opportunities are planned and provided by multiple personnel including coaches, consultants, mentors, and staff developers to meet the differentiated and developmental needs of teachers. New teachers receive the maximum support and experienced teachers have leadership opportunities to help support the professional learning throughout the school. Staff development is monitored and revised, based on the results of student data and teacher effectiveness needs. Teachers have Professional Development opportunities to assist them in developing specific strategies to support the learning needs of ELLs and SWDs in reading comprehension, academic vocabulary, and written analysis of texts, both literary and non-fiction. Effective strategies to support struggling students to access the complex texts of Common Core aligned curriculum are shared and analyzed for appropriate implementation with targeted students, in intentional student groupings in the classroom. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. NA 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). NA Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). NA 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teachers meet across content areas in weekly team meetings. Teachers look at student work in four week cycles, create assessments, norm the scoring of the assessments, and use the results to modify instruction. Professional development is provided on the creation of authentic, differentiated assessments and creating rubrics so that 8  students can self-assess and use actionable feedback to improve their work. Professional development is provided by Teacher Leaders, the Literacy Coach, and the Teachers College Staff Developer. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e,6 5a,5e,6 5e 5a, 5b, 5c, 5d, 5e,6 Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Federal Federal Federal Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 447,976.00 0 21,070.00 0 3,831`,844.00 x x x x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages: 9   Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 0  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Creston Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Creston Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 1  ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 2  ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Creston Academy , in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for 3  improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA); I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 4  Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 5  ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 6  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 7  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: Our Title III supplemental program for our ELLs is focused on extending the time students have for getting language support services while supporting them in their content area subjects. Data for the 2016 NYSESLAT indicates that approximately 13 % of students are entering, 19 % of students are emerging, 24% are transitioning, and 44 % of students are extending. . Schoolwide results on the New York State English Language Arts Exam indicate 67.2% at level 1, 31.4% at level 2, and 1.5% at level 3. Our data indicates that our ELLs need systematic, high quality literacy instruction that includes opportunities to read, write about, discuss, and listen to literature and informational text. Subgroups and grade levels of students to be served: Our Title III program is scheduled for Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20 pm to 4:20 pm and Saturdays from 9 am to 12 pm. We will open up a morning program from :am to 8:am. There will be two groups of 25 students on Wednesdays and Thursdays, and three groups of 25 students on Saturdays, and two groups of a5 students on weekday mornings, totaling 155 students. Our students will be enrolled by grade level and we will serve grades 6, 7, and 8. We will follow the methods used during the school day for grouping our students for instruction. Students will be grouped for instruction by reading level using the Scholastic Reading Inventory and by performance level on the NYSESLAT. The SRI provides the lexile information for each student tested. Teachers of Creston Academy will be using Bilingual/ESL instructional methodology with the content areas of English Language Arts, Native Language Arts, and Math. Our teachers will deliver instruction using both languages so that ELL students can obtain a clear and comprehensive understanding of the content concepts that will help them improve their academic abilities, as well as improve their second language abilities. Saturday Academy is reserved for long term ELLs. SIFE students and SWDs will be served in the after school program. 1. The materials that will be used to achieve academic and English language success are the following: *Achieve 3000 is a web based differentiated reading program. This program supports ELLs in English and Spanish literacy skills. This is supplementary to our daily instructional program. *Myon is a web based program that offers authentic literature and content based text at all Lexile levels. This is supplementary to our daily instruction program. *IXL learning is a web based program with differentiated instruction in both English and Math. This is supplementary to our daily instruction program. *Content based writing activities will correlate with the New Language Arts Progressions Standards in English learning as well as their native language. Teachers will model and continuously provide ELL students with instruction and directions on the use of different types of graphic organizers to assist them in collecting and organizing their 8  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information thoughts in many writing tasks, such as sequential charts, persuasive maps, venn diagrams for comparing and contrasting, and other forms of graphic organizers. News ELA is a web based program offering differentiated news articles about politics and culture. Rosetta Stone is a web based program for newcomers that provides interactive instruction in basic English. This is supplementary to our daily instructional program and is paid for by title III funds. 2. The materials that will be used to achieve academic success in math are the following: *Fast Math, a computer based program to improve fluency in mathematical computation. This is supplementary to our daily instruction program at no cost to Title III. *Do the Math, a manipulative based program created by Marilyn Burns, to build conceptual knowledge and vocabulary in numerical reasoning and problem solving. This is supplementary to our daily instruction program. at no cost to Title III. *Small group instruction addressing the mathematical weaknesses of the students. Teachers will scaffold the material, providing explicit instruction in mathematical concepts so that ELL students are able to progress toward mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. This is part of our daily instructional program. Small group instruction in Title III programs is paid for by Title III funds. *The Scholastic Math Inventory will be used to assess the strengths and weaknesses of the students, and to design instruction based on their individual needs. *Differentiation and Universal Design For Learning will be evident through individualized projects, products, processes, and classroom environment, such as purposeful seating arrangements with flexible student groups and process charts that empower students to become independent learners. Classroom libraries will reflect the differentiated reading levels of the students, as well as a variety of books and reading materials in both English and Spanish. Visual aids, photographs, manipulatives, realia, technology and IXL will be used to provide motivation, scaffold support, and extend opportunities for students based on their learning styles, needs, and strengths. Our school has SMARTBOARDS and document cameras in every room, and teachers are trained in using the SMARTBOARDS, Achieve 3000, MYON Learning, and IXL. This is embedded in our daily instructional program. 4. ELL students will be invited to participate in three ELL programs: *Title III Morning program will take place Monday through Thursday from 7:00 to 8:00 am beginning October through April. * Title III Extended Day Intervention Program will take place on Wednesdays and Thursdays from 2:20 to 4:20 pm beginning October 24through April 25. *Title III Saturday Academy will take place two Saturdays per month from 9am to 12pm beginning October 5 through May 25. 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information All teachers hired for these programs will be certified in Bilingual Education of ESL. Teachers are paid for with Title III funds. Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional Development Team is focused on providing the support to our staff to achieve continuous growth in teacher practice and student learning and progress. Through the Teacher Incentive Fund grant continuous our Peer Collaborative Teachers and Demonstration Teachers provide daily support to our staff. We have a full time Literacy Coach as well as a Teacher's College Coach who support teachers in the classroom through modeling, co-teaching and lab-sites. Beginning in October 2018 we will also have an MSQI Coach. All professional development is at no cost to Title III. The workshops this year will focus on the following topics: *Planning lessons and units with a focus on language use and language development. * The use of manipulatives, pictures, technology, and other resources to aid in language and content development. *Using questioning to enhance critical thinking. *Planning units to include vocabulary and language instruction to build students' academic language. *Grouping ELLs to include opportunities to practice speaking and listening with more proficient peers. *The use of modeling and visual exemplars to make the expectation of high quality work clear to students. 0  Part C: Professional Development *Creating assessment criteria to include outcomes that take into consideration students' language development. *Providing actionable feedback through conferencing to groups and individual students. The Creston Academy teachers will participate on several forms of professional development that will take place during the day and after school. These P.D.s will focus on Data Driven Instruction and Differentiated Instruction. Data Driven Instruction will assist teachers in planning for ELLs and ELLs with Special Needs to both achieve and exceed the state standards. Teachers will determine students strengths and weaknesses through the collection of data both formally and informally. We will use District Public to help us collect and analyze data, and form flexible instructional plans to address the needs of our ELLS. PD will explore the many kinds of data that will be used, how to analyze the data, and how to use the data to plan instruction. PD will examine grouping of students and create intervention plans that will help in the teaching of ELL students. ESL, Bilingual, and ELA teachers will meet monthly to review and analyze the data, and plan for instruction. Grade 6 meets period four the first Friday of each month, grade 7 meets period four the first Tuesday of each month, and grade eight meets period one the first Monday of each month. Looking at student work is another method of collecting data and determining the special needs of our English Language Learners. ESL, ELA, and Bilingual teachers meet twice monthly to look at student work. Grade Six meets Period four on the second and fourth Friday of each month, Grade Seven meets period four on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month, and Grade Eight meets period one on the second and fourth Monday of each month. Work from ELLs is examined to determine what supports they need to master the Common Core Learning Standards. On the third week of each month, teacher teams will meet by content area to create assessments with a special emphasis on student self-assessment through the use of rubrics. Rubrics will be differentiated for ELLs to include the New Language Arts Progression Standards. Small Group Differentiated Instruction will be determined from the data that will be collected. This information will assist our ELL teachers in designing the instructional plan that will meet the needs of each ELL student. The teachers will use strategies that will make lessons more comprehensible so that our students can achieve their full potential in learning. Teachers will plan for small group differentiated instruction Every Monday from 2:20 to 3:40. The Peer Intervention Coaches will provide PD on small group instruction from 2:20 to 3:00, as directed by the Chancellor , with special attention to ELLs and Students with Disabililties. From 3:00 t0 3:40 teachers will plan with their grade and content area for small group instruction based on the data. Data for Ells will include State Test ELA and Math scores, the NYSESLAT, The NYSETELL, The SRI, the SMI, as well as teacher made assessments. ESL and Bilingual teachers will use that data to plan for small group instruction that will scaffold Second Language Learners and support their progress toward mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. Pd will be provided every Tuesday from 3:00 to 3:40 based on our school goals of questioning and assessment. Teachers will plan for questions that engage all learners in higher order thinking. ESL and Bilingual teachers will examine the scaffolding of question to allow ELLs to think deeply and engage in rich conversation. Assessment PD will focus on how to differentiate assessment for diverse learners, including ELLs, and how to use assessment to design individual learning plans to meet the needs of each student.The PD will be led by the Peer Instructional 1  Part C: Professional Development Coaches, the Demonstration Teachers, and the Literacy Coach. The Literacy Coach will work with the Title III teachers one Tuesday each month to explore best practice for Ells and create a intervention toolkit that can be use in the Title III program. Title III teachers will meet with parents on Tuesdays from 2:20 to 3:00 to explain the Title III program to parents, and report on student progress. Achieve 3000 provides professional development three times per year. The trainer is in the school all day to provide professional development as well as demonstration lessons. The trainer demonstrates a lesson in each of the grades during the day. All ELA teachers in the grade, including ESL and Bilingual teachers vies the lesson in the grade labsite. The trainer provides supports and differentiation for English Language Learners. Teachers meet during lunch to debrief during "Lunch and Learn." From 2:20 to 3:40 the consultant provides PD to all ELA, ELL, and Bilingual teachers. The Achieve 3000 coach will work with Title III teachers to analyze data and create an instructional path to maximize progress for each student. Tim Steffen, a Teachers College Coach, will come to our school twice a month and model reading and writing workshop lessons as well as observe teachers. Afterwards, the coach will debrief teachers on the strengths/weakness of the lessons. The coach will provide assistance for the following week's lessons with the strategies that will help ELL students improve in ELA, Native Language, and Math. Mr. Steffen will be working with classes 601, 701, and 801. These classes all service English Language Learners with Disabilities. He will specifically model how to assess, engage, and instruct diverse learners. She will introduce and model effective teaching strategies for English Language Learners, and show teachers how to allow for multiple entry points in a rigorous curriculum. She will also conduct a weekly forum for teachers working in the Title III program. Teachers will look at data for the students they are servicing, create individual instructional plans for their students, and create formative and summative assessments to determine student progress and to adjust instruction accordingly. A coach from the Middle School Quality Initiative will come to the school during the 2018-2019 year to observe teachers, provide feedback, and model best practices for language acquisition and reading instruction for ELLs. The coach will work with teacher teams to assess English Language Learners and create instructional plans. The coach will provide professional development to the entire staff three times during the year beginning in September of 2018 and ending in May of 2019. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Translation and interpretation services are provided by our bilingual Parent Coordinator, Ms. Iverka Valerio, as well as our Parent Association President, who is always available to help out in our parent development meetings, since she herself is a parent in our school. During the course 2  Part D: Parental Engagement Activities of these meetings, ELL parents have the opportunity to have discussions and ask questions. If parents request materials, we provide them with further information. A few times parents have personal concerns that are addressed privately. Our goal is to give parents a clear understanding of all topics that are presented. Meetings are held each year with the parents of every ELL students. During these meetings, the ESL provider discusses student progress and parental concerns. This year we will give each parent a needs assessment survey to guide our parental workshops. Parents are informed of the workshops by flyers, parent calendars, and School Messenger. Flyers are sent home with students for each workshop. Parent calendars are delivered monthly by mail. They are also sent home with the students. School Messenger informs the parents of upcoming workshops in English, Spanish, and French. Agendas and attendance sheets are collected by the parent coordinator and stored in the general offic. Title III Parent Involvement Meetings and Workshops 2018 - 2019 1.Academic Success for ELLs Begins at home on October Provider will be Parent Coordinator/ELL Bilingual Staff. Translation will be provided. 2.How to prepare yourself for the parent/teacher conference (Before and During techniques) for ELL parents in November. 3.Develop and support Your ELL reader in December Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. 4.Help your ELL Grow as a Writer in January. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. 5. Common Sense Parenting in English and Spanish in February and March. A series of six workshops provided by Boystown USA. 6.How to help my child with the NYS State Exams in February. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. 7. Story and Bookmaking for ELLs in March. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. Parents and students will participate in this workshop. 8.ELL Parent trip (Museum de el Barrio) in April of 2019. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. This trip is paid for with Title III funds. 9.Career Pathways for ELLs in May. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. 10. Parent Appreciation in June. Provider will be Parent Coordinator. Translation will be provided. 11. Doing Art Together. Workshop will involve creating art with EL:L parents and students and will be paid for by Title III funds. 3 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) na  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL na na na na na na Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. na na na na na na na 4  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 10 School Name Creston Academy Borough Bronx School Number 447 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Mellissa Miller Coach Susan DeFillippo ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Marisela Polanco Teacher/Subject Area Lesley Lemos/Math Teacher/Subject Area type here Related-Service Provider Pilar Mercedes Superintendent Maribel Hulla Assistant Principal Deidre Spencer Coach School Counselor Bryan Cochol Parent Carmen Hernandez Parent Coordinator Iverka Valerio Field Support Center Staff Member type here Other (Name and Title) type here C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 3 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 3 0 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 476 5 Total number of ELLs 150 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 31.51%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): Spanish If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 K 1 2 3 4 Lang. Spanish Spanish Spanish Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 15 7 29 0 15 29 8 31 31 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 Tot # 15 29 31 0 0 0 75 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? At Creston Academy for Responsibility and Excellence, all students are assessed in September, using the Scholastic Reading Inventory. All Level 1 students are tested with the SRI and Fountas and Pinnell assessment for baseline data. Students are assessed in writing, using a baseline writing prompt. The results of these assessment tools are evaluated by the ELL teachers and the Literacy Coach. Their weekly curriculum planning sessions provide the structure to plan lessons and resources that address areas for next instructional steps that the data from student work reveals. The teachers share and analyze examples of student work and collaboratively plan appropriate techniques and best pedagogical strategies to support their students' improved learning outcomes. Teachers conference daily with students to determine strengths, weaknesses, and next steps. ENL teachers push into ELA classes to provide instructional support based on needs determined by the SRI, F&P, baseline assessments, ELA scores, and NYSESLAT scores. They use Teachers College reading and writing progressions to assess students and set goals. 6  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Creston Academy uses District Public, a consultant group that helps schools use data more effectively to collate and analyze the data so that we can determine trends and specific needs of our English Language Learners. Teacher Teams uses logs and weekly accountability forms to document collaborative inquiry work and curriculum planning. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? The school evaluates the success of the program through the progress and performance of the ELL students on the NYSESLAT exams. In addition, the ongoing analysis and evaluation of daily student work informs our monitoring of the strengths and weaknesses that need to be addressed, both by students and by teachers. We also analyze the data generated by the NYSELA, the State Math Test, and the State Science Test, including scale scores, performance levels, and item analyses. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Frequent classroom observations and visits by the Principal result in feedback and evaluation reports that document the successes and challenges. Coaches, Peer Collaborative Teachers, and Consultants also visit classes and observe teachers and students on a collegial level and provide another form of “critical friend” feedback, as the low-inference evidence observation indicates. Using the Charlotte Danielson Framework For Teaching allows all educators to assess the results in the classroom with a common language and understanding of best professional practices, across all 4 Domains. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] The school uses data to guide instruction for ELLs within a response to Intervention Framework that includes 3 Tiers of Instructional Support. The first tier involves the provision of rigorous curriculum and instruction in the general classroom. All ELL students are included in the Common Core Learning Standards aligned curriculum in all subject areas. Teachers are expected to provide appropriate scaffolds, supports, and appropriate data-driven differentiation to help all students (including ELLS) access the rigorous demands and expectations. The 2nd tier of intervention includes small group work, provided both by the classroom teacher and additional support personnel assigned to the classes (including ICT teachers and ENL teachers). More frequent assessments are administered to monitor students’ progress. The 3rd tier of intervention involves one on one instruction and tutoring. Conferring and individualized instruction occur both during the school day and after-school. Saturday Academy is another structure designed to provide additional instructional opportunities for the ELLs, provided by trained bilingual and ENL teachers. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. The data from the spring NYSESLAT and the NYSITELL reveal the following data: 6th Grade: Beginning 7 students, Entering 2 students; Emerging 6 students; Transitioning 13 students; Expanding 21 students; Commanding 5 students 7th Grade: Begninning 2 students; Entering 3 students; Emerging 13 students; Transitioning 11 students; Expanding 17 students; Commanding 11 students. 8th Grade: Beginning 4 students; Entering 3 students; Emerging 8 students; Transitioning 12 students; Expanding 20 students; Commanding 0 students Our ELL students scored the following on the 2017 ELA: Grade 6 Level one 72.1%, Level two 25.6%, Level three 23.0% Grade 7 Level one 63.0%, Level two 37.0%, Grade 8 Level one 66.7%, Level two 31.3%, Level 321.% Schoolwide Level one 67.2%, Level two 31.4%, Level 3 1.5% Our ELL students scored the following on the 2017 State Math Assessment: Grade 6 Level one 62.7%, Level two 30.5%, Level 3 5.1%, Level 4 1.7% 7  Grade 7 Level one 60.4%, Level two 32.1%, Level three 7.5% Grade 8 Level one 61.5%, Level two 30.8%, Level three 7.7% Schoolwide: Level one 61.6%, Level two 31.2%, Level three 6.8% The data patterns from the NYSESLAT modalities (reading, writing, listening, speaking) affect instructional decisions. Our school’s Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best emphasizes classroom practices that not only encourage daily student to student discussion and collaboration but incorporates lessons in which such engagement and student to student interaction is necessary for the tasks and objectives to be achieved. This leverages the strengths that the ELLs are bringing to the classroom (namely their strength in speaking) and encourages the concomitant skill of active listening (which the data suggests is a lesser strength). The Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives data reveal that over the years, students make progress but they are still not making adequate progress to reach performance targets, as set by New York State. Students’ strengths and weaknesses are identified through the analysis of the NYSESLAT data and shared by and with the classroom teachers, the push-in support personnel, such as the ENL teachers, and the content area teachers who also need to have this information so that they can provide personalized and precise instructional support. Student performance data is a shared responsibility so that ample time and effort is provided throughout the day by all teaching personnel who will impact on the students’ performance. ELLs are grouped in a specifically-designed class on each grade to facilitate the push-in services of ENL teachers. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? District Public collates, analyzes and dissaggregates data for our school. They provide professional development to our teachers to help them identify the strengths and weaknesses of our students so that they can develop instructional plans to meet their needs. Our ENL teachers push into classrooms to provide the supports and scaffolds our students need as indicated by the data. Weekly Inquiry teams look at student work with a focus on ELLs to determine their specific needs, and adjust instruction accordingly. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. Our Freestanding ENL program is a push-in mode. There is a licensed ENL teaher for each grade. Classes 601, 701, and 801 are ICT classess whose ELL students have IEPs. 604, 704, and 804 are composed of ELL students across all language proficiency levels.They travel together as a class. Push-in ENL teachers provide services in ELA classes for ten periods per week. For one period ENL teachers provide integrated ENL instruction for those students who are mandated to receive it. For one period the ENL teachers provide standalone instruction. The teachers in this school are good language models who can differentiate for ELL subpopulations and continuously work on oral language development with their students based on the individual student data they have collected.Strategies often used for ELLs include modeling, audiovisuals, semantic mapping, graphic organizers, explicit vocabulary development, activating prior knowledge, and engaging in accountable talk The push-in model allows for a better teacher to student ratio and thus the teachers can more closely monitor the students' progress and also provide meaningful formative feedback throughout the tasks and lessons. The appropriate number of mandated minutes of ENL instruction are provided for students according to their proficiency level on the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, and the mandated breakdown for English instruction and Spanish instruction is followed by the teachers. ELLs have rubrics, based on the NYSESLAT, that help the school monitor progress on a regular basis.If a unit takes six weeks, then the writing can be 8  developed during this time using the rubric.The rubric was originally designed to create a sense of accomplishment for ELLs even though they may have not moved up a whole point on the rubric. .Another idea that guided the creation of the rubric was the understanding that the skills used on the NYSESLAT writing portion of the test (conventions, organizations, vocabulary, and complexity) need to be understood by all faculty members working with ELLs. The rubric is successfully used in all content-area classes to further promote the understanding that every teacher is a literacy teacher, and to create a coherent curriculum for all ELLs.The school has found that these scaffolds and other strategies allow their ELL students to succeed using the same curriculum as their non-ELL students. b. TBE program. If applicable. We have a Spanish TBE class on Each grade. All classes are taught by licensed bililingual teachers. The bilingual teachers provide ESL instruction in the integrated model. The classes are heterogenous with students from all language proficiency levels.The mandated breakdown of English and Spanish instruction if followed by the teachers. The approriate number of minutes of mandated ENL instruction is provided by a licensed ENL teacher who pushes into Classroom. She provides standalone ESL instruction in the stand alone model. The teachers in this school are good language models who can differentiate for ELL subpopulations and continuously work on oral language development with their students based on the individual student data they have collected.Strategies often used for ELLs include modeling, audiovisuals, semantic mapping, graphic organizers, explicit vocabulary development, activating prior knowledge, and engaging in accountable talk The push-in model allows for a better teacher to student ratio and thus the teachers can more closely monitor the students' progress and also provide meaningful formative feedback throughout the teasks and lessons. The appropriate number of mandated minutes of ESL instruction are provided and the mandated breakdown for English instruction and Spanish instruction is followed by the teachers. ELLs have rubrics, based on the NYSESLAT, that help the school monitor progress on a regular basis.If a unit takes six weeks, then the writing can be developed during this time using the rubric.The rubric was originally designed to create a sense of accomplishment for ELLs even though they may have not moved up a whole point on the rubric. .Another idea that guided the creation of the rubric was the understanding that the skills used on the NYSESLAT writing portion of the test (conventions, organizations, vocabulary, and complexity) need to be understood by all faculty members working with ELLs. The rubric is successfully used in all content-area classes to further promote the understanding that every teacher is a literacy teacher, and to create a coherent curriculum for all ELLs.The school has found that these scaffolds and other strategies allow their ELL students to succeed using the same curriculum as their non-ELL students. Teachers translate rubrics into Spanish so that students understand what is expected of them. Math and Science and Social Studies are taught in Spanish to entering and emerging students. All bilingual students are programmed for one unit of Home Language Arts. Entering and emerging ELLs are taught in Spanish for Math and Science. Transitioning and expanding ELLs are taught Math in Spanish. c. DL program. If applicable. NA: 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Certified bilingual teachers are hired and assigned to the bilingual classes. Certified ENL teachrs are hired to provide ENL services to Standalone ENL classes and bilingual classes. Entering students receive 180 minute of standalone ENL and 180 minutes of Integrated ENL. Emerging students receive 90 minutes of Stand alone ENL, 180 minutes of integrated ENL, and another 90 minutes that are flexible. Transitional students receive 90 minutes of integrated ENL and 90 minutes that are flexible. Extending students receive 18o minutes of integrated ENL. Commanding students receive 90 minutes that are flexible. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. 9  The bilingual classes all have an additional ENL teacher who pushes into the class to provide additional tiered support with the targeted students, providing the mandated number of minutes of ENL instruction, using ENL strategies to support all content areas. The bilingual teachers teach ELA, ENL in English, and Native Language Arts in Spanish. They teach Math and Social Studies in both languages, according to the varied language proficiency levels within their classes. The 6th grade and 7th grade science teachers are both bilingual and the 8th grade science teacher is bilingual but does not speak Spanish. All three classes are are assigned paraprofessionals who support academic language acquisition. The sfreestanding ENL classes all have licensed ENL teachers who provide scaffolds and differentiated learning experiences so that our ELLs can access the Core Curriculum Learning Standards.The Common Core Learning Standards-aligned curricula in the content areas is delivered with Universal Design for Learning practices that support and scaffold the language needs of the ELL students. In addtiion, SIOP strategies are used to support ELLs' content mastery and language acquisition. Intentional emphasis is placed on vocabulary development. Our school's Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best highlights best pedagogical practices that serve to support meeting the needs of all students, including, of course, ELLs. Modeling, explicit instruction, rubrics, meaningful and actionable feedback through one-on-one conferring and small group instruction, engaging materials, tasks, and questions, emphasis on student to student discussion and collaborative inquiry with higher-order thinking and cognitive demands create a learning environment that sets high expectations and also provides matching supports for the ELL students to help them meet the high standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their native languages All ELLs are evaluated using The Achieve 3000 placement test in both English and Spanish. This placement test produces a lexile level. We also give the Spanish DRA to students well below their grade level in Spanish so that we can diagnose reading difficulties. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are appropriately evaluated by their classroom teachers in their native language through the classroom tasks and activities, aligned to the curriculum. ELLs are also evaluated on a regular basis by classroom teachers as they confer with students in small groups or one-on-one. They are evaluated both in Common Core Standards work as well as with native language materials, designed to meet the needs of the students. Teachers enter students’ scores on our ENGRADE system which is accessible to students, parents, teachers, and administrators. It is available in real time accessibility. It is well used throughout our school. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Differentiation of instruction for ELL subgroups takes place, as follows: Students who are identified as SIFE and Long term ELL are offered opportunities to use technology to differentiate their reading instruction, both by reading level and by interest. They also receive instruction in small (4-6 students) and very small (2-3 students) guided reading groups. These approaches help them receive focused, personalized, and low-risk attention. ESL teachers and bilingual teachers meet together to plan, with specific attention to best practices for ELL instruction. These teachers also attend common planning sessions on a weekly basis with other teachers on their grade for both ELA and Math. Students who are recent arrivals and those students who have less than three years in an English Language school system are paired with proficient students who speak both languages. This peer support is very effective in helping students to feel comfortable in a new environment. Respect for All tenets are emphasized, as language and cultural differences are respected and supported. Teachers welcome students’ participation in the learning process, in whichever language helps the student learn best. As new language is being acquired, native language is used to access the content and activities. Directions and instructions may be provided in both languages, with a variety of quality visual aids and/or realia, and other strategies used to reinforce and communicate concepts and skills. ELLs who have received 4-6 years of ENL services have their ENL and bilingual teachers create specific lessons that are comprehensible by making language and content very clear, achievable and with rubrics in both languages to emphasize expectations. Process charts in the classroom are also posted conspicuously to support students’ learning. Modeling, 0  demonstrating, and explicit instruction are part of our school’s highlighted practices. Student engagement and effective, actionable feedback to students provide for ample opportunities for students to practice independently and/or groups and partners, with teachers providing ongoing checks for understanding and actionable feedback for next steps. Conferring and conference notes ensure that students receive consistent and individualized attention. ELL students who scored level 1 in both ELA and Math on the spring 2015 state tests receive intervention in ELA and Math, through one on one tutoring by their teachers. ELL students work on project-based activities that encourage peer collaboration, investigation, and research. Guided reading groups are another structure that occur on a scheduled basis throughout the day and throughout the year, with students who have common learning needs and levels. Flexible groups are created by the teacher, using the data they have on the students, including ELA and Math scores, as well as NYSESLAT results. Intervention in Math is provided in both languages, as needed. Math baseline assessments are given in September and results are used to form student groups. ELL students also have access to a web-based math program, called Fast Math.” This program provides support in English and in Spanish. ELLs who have test out of ELL status are provided two years of support by a certified ENL teacher. The teacher works with the students in the ELA classroom for 90 minutes weekly to support the development of academic vocabulary and critical thinking skills necessary to succeed in high school, college, and careers. The teacher provides access to the common core learning standards through multiple modalities, including computers, smartboard technology, and audiobooks. ELL students who score Commanding on the NYSESLAT are provided with the following testing accommodations: separate location, time and a half. Such accommodations are also provided during simulation tests. These accommodations are provided for 2 consecutive years to all proficient ELLS to continue to support their language proficiency. Our newly-arrived ELLs are admitted on the first day of school. They are welcomed, as are their parents. They are informed of all school expectations, both verbally and through the sharing of the school’s Student Handbook. The Parent Coordinator, as well as the class teacher, are available to provide additional translation, if necessary. Since differentiation and one-on-one conferencing are practices that have been and continue to be emphasized in our school, teachers meet individually with students on a regular basis. Professional collaboration is also an embedded practice and occurs regularly through our planned common periods for professional planning. These sessions focus on Looking at Student Work, Sharing Best Teaching Practices, Curriculum Planning. Teachers share student work, including work of all sub-groups, with a particular attention to the subgroups of Ells ahd SWDs. ICT teachers, ENL teachers, and paraprofessionals are assigned to push-in and desdgnated students are intentionally assigned to ensure accountability and focus. Lesson plans reflect the groups an the assigned personnel as well as tasks and activities that will be coordinated with the curriculum and pedagogy. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELL students in all grades are invited to participate in after school programs via a letter to the parent, notifying them of the programs. The letter details the purpose of the program, the days and times that the program will be in session. Parents are informed that students who sign up are accepted into the program. Daily attendance is taken and when a student is absent, the secretary makes a call to the home to follow up. The goals of the after school programs include emphasis on developing the ELL students’ second language literacy skills in the four language modalities. The after school program uses the following materials: Achieve 3000 (web-based differentiated reading program in English and in Spanish), classroom libraries with Spanish and English language books and other reading materials, picture dictionaries with related activities and audio supports, standard English-Spanish dictionaries, Rosetta Stone language acquisition software (licenses are purchased by the school for individual students). Classrooms libraries are established and enhanced throughout the year with materials that reflect Common Core Lexile level books, large collections of non-fiction texts, as well as books at students’ independent reading level. The interests, backgrounds, and cultures of the students are also considered when adding books to the libraries. Saturday Academy is also designed to provide additional instructional time for ELLs and includes trips around New York City, in which real-life experiences provide the opportunities to develop rich and specific language through experiential learning activities. The socialization of the experiences in small groups makes the learning very natural and enjoyable for the students, as well as opening up their exposure to New York City with their peers and the teacher as a “guide." SIOP strategies are used to support ELLs' content mastery and language acquisition. Intentional emphasis is placed on vocabulary development. Our school's Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best highlights best pedagogical practices that serve to support meeting the needs of all students, including, of course, ELLs. Modeling, explicit instruction, rubrics, meaningful and actionable feedback through one-on-one conferring and small group instruction, engaging materials, tasks, and questions, emphasis on student to 1  student discussion and collaborative inquiry with higher-order thinking and cognitive demands create a learning environment that sets high expectations and also provides matching supports for the ELL students to help them meet the high standards. ICT teachers review students' IEPs to ensure that the mandated accommodations and modifications are being implemented. In addition, the IEP identifies the students' disabilities and the ICT teachers meet routinely on a weekly basis with the co-teacher to plan strategies to address the students' learning needs, in alignment with the curriculum being implemented. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? The year begins with a battery of diagnostic tests in all content areas to determine which students are below level, on level, and above level. These results are reviewed and correlated with the most current NYSESLAT results, New York State exams in ELA and Math. Students receive targeted intervention, aligned to scaffold their access to Common Core Learning Standards. In identifying students who require extension of services, we focus on the specific characteristics of the learner that must be addressed through the extension services. The students with 3-4 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, and small group instruction. The students with 5 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, small group instruction, and independent study. All students in our ESL program receive additional support through guided reading with instructional level texts and vocabulary development. Spanish leveled libraries in the classes provide ample resources for students to engage in high-success reading with high interest books, matched to the independent reading levels of the students. Spanish text books in Math and Social Studies have been purchased and are used to support content instruction. Books on tape provide another modality support. Language dictionaries with correlated workbooks, learning activities, audio CDs, and materials for teacher support have been very useful for diverse learners. Students work independently, at their level, and are monitored closely and often, by the teachers. Common Core Language Standards are emphasized, in addition to the literacy and math standards, when planning learning targets and goals for student progress and performance. Our classes are all grouped heterogeneously to encourage opportunities for students to engage in rich student to student discussion, with opportunities to hear and approximate wide range and register for language practice. As the school receives Title 1 funding through school-wide project, all programs are planned to provide opportunities for all students and families. Title III Extended Day Intervention Program focuses on developing ELLs second language literacy skills in all four modalities. ELL Vacation Academy provides additional instructional time and opportunity for ELLS during Mid Winter Recess and Easter Vacation. Emphasis is on providing very small group instruction, with students reading books matched to their level for high success reading experience. Achieve 3000 is highly effective as a web-based, individualized reading program for students to read in English, at their level, and in Spanish at their level, with materials differentiated by their interest. Saturday Academy incorporates focus on writing effective Common Core standards-based argument essays, with evidence from texts. Literature clubs, technology, and trips provide diverse opportunities for the diverse learners to leverage their personal learning strengths, while building on their lesser strengths and areas of need. Explicit “test-taking” support also supplements our core instructional program. Test language and strategies are taught and practiced throughout the year. The four modalities are incorporated in the lessons. We have an extensive physical education program during the day and after school. Students receive health and physical education instruction, daily. Every morning, students also have the opportunity to participate in the Young Runners Club. After school activities include Ultimate Frisbee, Flag Football, Fitness Club, Basketball Teams, and Volleyball Teams. These programs are funded the Department of Education’s CHAMPS program. SMART BOARDS in every class provide multiple, engaging opportunities to access and represent resources, with UDL principles of representation of instructional materials being implemented by the teachers, on a regular basis. Utilizing visual supports and realia, as well as hands-on projects reinforce the abstract concepts and content. Teachers provide intervention, using best Response to Intervention guidelines (3 tiered approach), using the research from Richard Allington’s What Really Matters In Response to Intervention and Douglas Fisher, Nancy Frey, and Carol Rothenberg’s Implementing RTI with English Learners, and Strategies for Success with English Language Learners by Rojas. Targeted intervention in Math is provided through extended day program 2xs/week. Scholastic Math Inventory assessments are administered monthly and provide frequent updated data about students' performance for teachers to adjust their instruction accordingly. FAST MATH is another program that supports targeted instruction for students needing help in math computation. Intervention Kits from Marilyn Burns (mathematics expert and author) provide intervention supprot for the ELLs who are performing at the lowest levels in math. 2  8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The year begins with a battery of diagnostic tests in all content areas to determine which students are below level, on level, and above level. These results are reviewed and correlated with the most current NYSESLAT results, New York State exams in ELA and Math. Students receive targeted intervention, aligned to scaffold their access to Common Core Learning Standards. In identifying students who require extension of services, we focus on the specific characteristics of the learner that must be addressed through the extension services. The students with 3-4 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, and small group instruction. The students with 5 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, small group instruction, and independent study. All students in our ESL program receive additional support through guided reading with instructional level texts and vocabulary development. Spanish leveled libraries in the classes provide ample resources for students to engage in high-success reading with high interest books, matched to the independent reading levels of the students. Spanish text books in Math and Social Studies have been purchased and are used to support content instruction. Books on tape provide another modality support. Language dictionaries with correlated workbooks, learning activities, audio CDs, and materials for teacher support have been very useful for diverse learners. Students work independently, at their level, and are monitored closely and often, by the teachers. Common Core Language Standards are emphasized, in addition to the literacy and math standards, when planning learning targets and goals for student progress and performance. Our classes are all grouped heterogeneously to encourage opportunities for students to engage in rich student to student discussion, with opportunities to hear and approximate wide range and register for language practice. As the school receives Title 1 funding through school-wide project, all programs are planned to provide opportunities for all students and families. Title III Extended Day Intervention Program focuses on developing ELLs second language literacy skills in all four modalities. ELL Vacation Academy provides additional instructional time and opportunity for ELLS during Mid Winter Recess and Easter Vacation. Emphasis is on providing very small group instruction, with students reading books matched to their level for high success reading experience. Achieve 3000 is highly effective as a web-based, individualized reading program for students to read in English, at their level, and in Spanish at their level, with materials differentiated by their interest. Saturday Academy incorporates focus on writing effective Common Core standards-based argument essays, with evidence from texts. Literature clubs, technology, and trips provide diverse opportunities for the diverse learners to leverage their personal learning strengths, while building on their lesser strengths and areas of need. Explicit “test-taking” support also supplements our core instructional program. Test language and strategies are taught and practiced throughout the year. The four modalities are incorporated in the lessons. We have an extensive physical education program during the day and after school. Students receive health and physical education instruction, daily. Every morning, students also have the opportunity to participate in the Young Runners Club. After school activities include Ultimate Frisbee, Flag Football, Fitness Club, Basketball Teams, and Volleyball Teams. These programs are funded the Department of Education’s CHAMPS program. SMART BOARDS in every class provide multiple, engaging opportunities to access and represent resources, with UDL principles of representation of instructional materials being implemented by the teachers, on a regular basis. Utilizing visual supports and realia, as well as hands-on projects reinforce the abstract concepts and content. Teachers provide intervention, using best Response to Intervention guidelines (3 tiered approach), using the research from Richard Allington’s What Really Matters In Response to Intervention and Douglas Fisher, Nancy Frey, and Carol Rothenberg’s Implementing RTI with English Learners, and Strategies for Success with English Language Learners by Rojas. Targeted intervention in Math is provided through extended day program 2xs/week. Scholastic Math Inventory assessments are administered monthly and provide frequent updated data about students' performance for teachers to adjust their instruction accordingly. FAST MATH is another program that supports targeted instruction for students needing help in math computation. Intervention Kits from Marilyn Burns (mathematics expert and author) provide intervention supprot for the ELLs who are performing at the lowest levels in math. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have a Teachers College staff developer that will provide support to our teachers and will focus on strategies and scaffolds to support English Language Learners. Wherever possible, she is providing Spanish translation of materials. Rosetta Stone will be provided for all newcomers in English and their home language.. We have instituted a Saturday Academy for long term ELLs so that we can explicitly tailor instruction to their needs. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? 3  We continue to reflect on our program and practices to enhance and refine our offerings, both in content and in practice. We do not anticipate discontinuing any services or programs. We seek to enhance the ones we provide with continuing reflection and modifications, as per the Common Core Learning Standards expectations to surface the gaps and address them, through professional collaboration and enhanced expertise and experience. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. They are invited to attend our extended day programs, Saturday Academy, all sports programs, and all extra-curricular events. The year begins with a battery of diagnostic tests in all content areas to determine which students are below level, on level, and above level. These results are reviewed and correlated with the most current NYSESLAT results, New York State exams in ELA and Math. Students receive targeted intervention, aligned to scaffold their access to Common Core Learning Standards. In identifying students who require extension of services, we focus on the specific characteristics of the learner that must be addressed through the extension services. The students with 3-4 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, and small group instruction. The students with 5 years of service receive intervention that includes one-on-one tutoring, projects, small group instruction, and independent study. All students in our ESL program receive additional support through guided reading with instructional level texts and vocabulary development. Spanish leveled libraries in the classes provide ample resources for students to engage in high-success reading with high interest books, matched to the independent reading levels of the students. Spanish text books in Math and Social Studies have been purchased and are used to support content instruction. Books on tape provide another modality support. Language dictionaries with correlated workbooks, learning activities, audio CDs, and materials for teacher support have been very useful for diverse learners. Students work independently, at their level, and are monitored closely and often, by the teachers. Common Core Language Standards are emphasized, in addition to the literacy and math standards, when planning learning targets and goals for student progress and performance. Our classes are all grouped heterogeneously to encourage opportunities for students to engage in rich student to student discussion, with opportunities to hear and approximate wide range and register for language practice. As the school receives Title 1 funding through school-wide project, all programs are planned to provide opportunities for all students and families. Title III Extended Day Intervention Program focuses on developing ELLs second language literacy skills in all four modalities. ELL Vacation Academy provides additional instructional time and opportunity for ELLS during Mid Winter Recess and Easter Vacation. Emphasis is on providing very small group instruction, with students reading books matched to their level for high success reading experience. Achieve 3000 is highly effective as a web-based, individualized reading program for students to read in English, at their level, and in Spanish at their level, with materials differentiated by their interest. Saturday Academy incorporates focus on writing effective Common Core standards-based argument essays, with evidence from texts. Literature clubs, technology, and trips provide diverse opportunities for the diverse learners to leverage their personal learning strengths, while building on their lesser strengths and areas of need. Explicit “test-taking” support also supplements our core instructional program. Test language and strategies are taught and practiced throughout the year. The four modalities are incorporated in the lessons. We have an extensive physical education program during the day and after school. Students receive health and physical education instruction, daily. Every morning, students also have the opportunity to participate in the Young Runners Club. After school activities include Ultimate Frisbee, Flag Football, Fitness Club, Basketball Teams, and Volleyball Teams. These programs are funded the Department of Education’s CHAMPS program. SMART BOARDS in every class provide multiple, engaging opportunities to access and represent resources, with UDL principles of representation of instructional materials being implemented by the teachers, on a regular basis. Utilizing visual supports and realia, as well as hands-on projects reinforce the abstract concepts and content. Teachers provide intervention, using best Response to Intervention guidelines (3 tiered approach), using the research from Richard Allington’s What Really Matters In Response to Intervention and Douglas Fisher, Nancy Frey, and Carol Rothenberg’s Implementing RTI with English Learners, and Strategies for Success with English Language Learners by Rojas. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. The instructional materials used to support ELLs include all of the Common Core Standards-aligned reading and math curriculum materials, as recommended by the Department of Education. Teachers often translate materials for students who are not able to access the English at the level of proficiency required for the texts presented. Spanish-English dictionaries and 4  support CDs provide opportunities for students to independently develop vocabulary at their own individual pace. Individual license are purchased by the school for students to access Rosetta Stone to learn English. Class libraries for ELLs include abundant independent reading books and materials, in both English and in Spanish. These reflect both independent reading levels of the students and student interest. Challenge books are also readily available. The school consistently addresses its mission to develop an authentic love of reading by all students by encouraging great student choice in reading and providing extensive amount of time for independent reading. Students are encouraged to request titles of books for the school to purchase. SMART BOARDS in every classroom, as well as extensive access to laptops, allow students to use internet resources (with guidance and supervision of teachers) to support their learning. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Native language support is provided in each program model that we offer (TBE and ESL). In TBE classes, native language instruction is delivered in native language arts literacy, math, and content areas. Students write in both English and in Spanish. Students are grouped in flexible groupings, based on common learning needs. Therefore, sometimes, they are grouped for instruction by language proficiency level and sometimes they are organized in other group configurations for peer to peer conversations, tutoring, and collaborative projects. Teachers’ decisions about groupings are based on purpose, activities, tasks, and data from students’ evidence-based student work products. In ESL classes, emphasis on English language development and acquisition uses effective strategies, as presented by experts in the field, such as Calderon, Gibbons, Freeman and Freeman. Explicit teaching and student work with cognates, idiomatic expressions, figurative language, collocations, and Tier 2 vocabulary (as per Isabelle Beck’s work on vocabulary instruction). Leveled books in Spanish are provided in each classroom library and students are encouraged to read independently at their level.The DOE Core Curriculum libraries are available in Spanish, including literature and non-fiction texts. Teacher-translated materials are also created to support students who need Spanish versions of materials not available. Achieve 3000, an online program for students offeres differentiated reading level articles in Spanish. EScience is also available in Spanish. The reading in content area is aligned to DOE Science Scope and Sequence and core curriculum during science classes for grades 6, 7, and 8. Additional rigorous reading materials in Spanish are being explored through Instituto Cervantes and the DOE Office of ELLs to ensure common core learning standards texts are abundantly available for the ELLs.. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. ELL students receive their required services and these services support the students’ needs to acquire proficiency in English and achieve academic growth on their grade level. The resources used by all teachers who provide services correspond to the ELLs’ age and grade level. Using the strategies and supports from resources, such as SMART BOARDS, audio tapes, and visual supports, students are taught in a developmentally appropriate way, using high interest materials for low level readers, engaging lessons and thought-provoking read alouds to prompt higher order thinking and generate amplified language opportunities among students, appropriate soft ware, while at the same time, addressing the key standards from CCLS. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? The instructional materials used to support ELLs include all of the Common Core Standards-aligned reading and math curriculum materials, as recommended by the Department of Education. Teachers often translate materials for students who are not able to access the English at the level of proficiency required for the texts presented. Spanish-English dictionaries and support CDs provide opportunities for students to independently develop vocabulary at their own individual pace. Individual license are purchased by the school for students to access Rosetta Stone to learn English. Class libraries for ELLs include abundant independent reading books and materials, in both English and in Spanish. These reflect both independent reading levels of the students and student interest. Challenge books are also readily available. The school consistently addresses its mission to develop an authentic love of reading by all students by encouraging great student choice in reading and providing extensive amount of time for independent reading. Students are encouraged to request titles of books for the school to purchase. SMART BOARDS in every classroom, as well as extensive access to laptops, allow students to use internet resources (with guidance and supervision of teachers) to support their learning. Our school shares the lunchroom, auditorium, and library with two elementary schools. All bilingual classes are programmed for one library period weekly. 5  16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our school assists newly-enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the year. All such students and their families are invited to attend Orientation Meetings to learn about the program and the school. Our Student Handbook details expectations for students. Our Parent Coordinator is available to assist students during the day, with an additional support of being present in the cafeteria, daily, so that students have easy access to her for help while not losing instructional time from classes. This is particularly supportive for the ELL students who are enrolled throughout the school year. They are provided with the Student Handbook and help in understanding the expectation comes in many ways, through the support of guidance personnel, Parent Coordinator, Dean, and of course, the classroom teachers. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We do not offer any language electives at this time. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? NA Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Increasing staff effectiveness through meaningful professional development is directly correlated to student achievement. One of our school goals is to provide all staff with appropriate, differentiated, tiered professional development opportunities, throughout the year. The language development of our ELL and bilingual students has been identified as an integral aspect of our school’s priority instructional focus, and as such, becomes the responsibility of all teaching personnel, as a shared goal. All professional development includes a particular and distinct attention to the needs of ELL learners. Every Monday afternoon from 2:20-3:00 PM, all staff members (including teachers and paraprofessionals) receive professional development from the two collaborative teachers, the five model teachers, and various outside consultants. Professional development is based on the Danielson Framework, our Coherent Set of Beliefs About How Students Learn Best, and the Common Core Learning Standards. Special emphasis is placed on the needs of ELLs and SWDs. Outside consultants from Teachers College and Achieve 3000 show teachers how to scaffold their lessons for ELLs and SWDS. Teacher Teams meet for common planning one period a week during the school day, every Monday fro 3 to 3:40, and every Tuesday from 3 to 3:35. Common Core curriculum units are adapted and revised to provide the necessary scaffolds for diverse learners. The Danielson Framework For Teaching is also embedded in the professional development to norm the staff understanding of effective teaching practices. Bilingual and ENL teachers are sent to workshops provided by the Borough Support Office and Teachers College Paraprofessionals attend professional development on Monday afternoons alongside the teachers they work with. Our current teaching staff in our bilingual and ESL program have been interviewed and hired, based on their level of effectiveness and their predicted level of effectiveness (new teachers and newly hired teachers). Focusing on best and current research and professional texts, articles, videos, and webinars provided by the DOE, other educational institutions, and experts in this area of instruction are integrated into the professional development for all teachers, strengthening best practices in this area. Two teachers have been identified as Peer Collaborative Teachers and provide professional development for all teachers, for teacher teams, and for individual teachers. A staff developer also supports the professional development of the teachers and paraprofessionals. Weekly content area meetings are built into the school schedule and a memorandum and year-long 6  calendar identify and emphasize expectations, including the protocols, the documentation, the focus of Looking at Student Work, Sharing Best teaching Practices (aligned to the Danielson Framework For Teaching). Additional time is established for Thursday afternoons for content area teachers to meet to collaborate and plan Common Core aligned curriculum, with an attention to the differentiated needs of diverse learners. Developing the appropriate scaffolds, supports, and extension for diverse learners is the focus to help students access the rigorous Common Core aligned curricula in all content areas. ENL teachers and bilingual teachers have multiple opportunities to interface together as a cohort and with their colleagues on their respective grades, to be in sync with the expectations of the Common Core Learning Standards and school-wide Common Core curricula. Our pupil personnel secretary and ATS specialist, and parent coordinator are trained by the ENL coordinator on the proper procedures for admitting students to the school. They are trained to give parents the home language survey and how to enter the results into ATS. The ENL coordinator works closely with admitting personnel to ensure ELLs are identified, and correct procedures are followed.Our STARS specialist attends Professional Development workshops given by the Borough Support Center on entering ELL services in STARS correctly. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our school guidance staff is highly qualified to assist our ELL students and their parents both as they transition from 5th grade into 6th grade and as our 8th grade students prepare to go to high school. Both transitions are addressed throughout the year by our 3 guidance counselors. Our Student Handbook is distributed to incoming 6th graders before the opening of school at a new students’ orientation meeting for students and their parents. Informational sessions for 8th grade students and their parents are offered on Saturdays (to make the time convenient for working parents) to provide up-to-date details and materials about the high school application process and selection process. Parents receive folders with valuable information, including the dates for the City-wide High School Fairs in September and October. The folder also contains information on career choices, specialized high schools, and a directory for NYC high schools is distributed. During the regular school day, guidance counselors meet with small groups of students to discuss the procedures and processes for selecting a high school and answer any questions that arise during the application process. The counselors are available during the students’ lunch period to provide additional opportunities for individual students to consult with guidance personnel. A class is offered to provide support for students to prepare them for the Specialized High Schools. Workshops are provided for parents on accessing and using ENGRADE online to help monitor their children's work in school. Monthly parent workshops are provided by the Parent Coordinator and include topics, such as Common Core Learning Standards, College and Career Readiness, High School Entrance, new students' issues, as well as topics pertinent to all adolescents. A minimum of fifteen percent of the required professional development our school provides to teachers and administrators will specifically address the needs of English Language Learners. This will include professional development on language acquisition, and best practices for co-teaching strategies and integrating language and content instruction for English language learners. Our Inquiry Team will focus on analyzing the work of ELLS to determine the needs of this special population, and how we can facilitate their progress toward mastery of the Common Core Learning Standards. We will provide a minimum of fifty percent of the required professional development hours for our bilingual and ENL teachers in language acquisition with alignment with core content area instruction. Professional development opportunities that focus on ELL strategies that are provided both by our Borough Support Center, by Teachers College, and by the DOE are distributed to staff to add to the professional development options. Agendas and sign sheets for all PD training that emphasizes best instructional strategies for ELLs are filed and maintained in the Principal's office. Our bilingual and ENL teachers meet monthly The Peer Instructional Coach keeps attendance sheets, agendas, and powerpoints of all pds on Monday and Tuesday afternoons. Teacher leaders keep agendas and attendance sheets of weekly team meetings in binders which are available for examination The payroll secretary keeps records of all pd outside of the school, (Teachers College, Borough Support Center.) 7  Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? The ENL teachers will meet with all ELL parents individually on Tuesdays in the time designated as parent involvement. Translators will be provided in the parent's home language. If a parent cannot meet at the designated time, the ENL teacher will make every effort to accommodate the parent's schedule. The ENL teachers will provide information about the language development of the student, the NYSESLAT or NYSITELL results, and the student's progress in all content areas. The ENL teachers meet with individually with parents of all ELL Students yearly to explain the NYSESLAT results, and inform them of the support and services their child is receiving. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Ongoing communication with parents is an essential component for a successful school program. Our school holds monthly Parent Association and School Leadership Team meetings. We promote parent involvement through the following school activities: Provision of translators, when necessary; telephone contact; organization of parent open houses; bilingual school notices; organization of school-wide events for families; award ceremonies for students and families; monthly parent meetings; community events; family nights, with a focus on content areas; parent-student sports nights; parent-teacher conferences; parents welcomed for class field trips; invitations for student performances, fairs, and talent shows. Our Title III Immigrant Funds Supplemental Program are used to increase parental involvement and community collaboration with families, and in particular, families of ELLs. Monthly workshops included topics generated through collaboration between parents and school and included a wide range, such as Cyber-bullying, academic success of ELLs, Common Core Standards, ARIS Parent Link access, career pathways for ELLs, building language skills in the summertime for ELLs. And even includes trips and workshops at El Museo del Barrio. Translation is always provided during all school events. Learning Leaders provides the opportunity for parents to volunteer in classrooms, with training and certification. Open access for our parents in the school library is available to support parents. School-wide Curriculum Night and grade-level Orientation Sessions provide opportunities for teachers and parents to share expectations, challenges, and supports for the children. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 8 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Mellissa Miller, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 9  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Creston Academy School DBN: 10X447 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Mellissa Miller Title Principal /Diedre Spencer Assistant Principal Iverka Valerio Parent Coordinator Marisela Polanco ENL/Bilingual Teacher Carmen Hernandez Parent Lesley Lemos Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Susan DeFillippo Bryan Cochol Maribel Hula Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 0 2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 10x447 School Name: Creston Academy For Responsibility Superintendent: The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Iverka Valerio Parent Coordinator No Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The data and methodologies used to assess the school’s written translation and oral interpretation ensures that all parents are provided with appropriate and timely information in a language they can understand, include the following: 1. Parents fill out the school’s Learning Environment Survey and are supported in this through the interpretation and translation services of the Parent Coordinator and other bilingual staff. 2. Parents with Hispanic surnames who are enrolling new student admits to the school are given the Home Language Identification Survey. This information is entered on the ATS screen for HLIS. An interview with the parent and the child is conducted by a licensed pedagogue. The completed HLIS form is placed in the student's cumulative file and remains as a part of the student's permanent record. The school determines within 30 days of a student’s enrollment the primary language spoken by the parent and whether language assistance will be 1  needed for the parent to communicate effectively with the school and DOE. The numbers and names of parents who require interpretations and translation services are reflected by the data of the HLIS surveys. We currently have 150 ELLs (approximately 31.6% of our total student population), many of whose parents have limited English language ability. Therefore, all notices from the school are sent home, in English and translated into Spanish. Parents are kept well-informed about the school activities and about their children's progress and performance. There are very few ELL students whose home language is other than Spanish or English but every effort is made to ensure that these parents are also kept well-informed through the translation and interpretation services of trained pedagogues who are fluent in those languages and through the DOE Translation office. The parent coordinator is always in attendance at school workshops, meetings, and events in order to translate, if necessary, as are other licensed personnel who are bilingual. 3. The school’s percentage of Hispanic students and families and the growing population of ELLs and Transitional Bilingual Education students are clear indicators of the need for translation and interpretation services in Spanish. 4. The school maintains a record of the primary language of each student and this information is maintained in ATS and on the students’ emergency card. 5. As part of the school’s CEP Planning with the School Leadership Team the school addresses the language assistance needs, including:a. regular and timely provision of translated documents through either existing resources or the Translation and Interpretation Unit b. timely provision of interpretation services at group and one-on-one meetings upon request when such services are necessary for parents to communicate with teachers, guidance counselors, school nurse and/or other school staff regarding critical information about their child’s education; c. how it will provide those needs d. the budgetary and staffing resources it is devoting to fulfill those needs e compliance with the notification requirements in Section VII of Chancellors’ Regulation A-663. 6. Additiional ways to collect data: ATS report of preferred languages and Blue Card data 7. Parent preferred languages: Afrikaans, Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, French, Fulani, Soninke, Spanish and vietnamese 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Arabic Bengali Chinese French Fulani 5 4 2 3 1 0.8 0.64 0.32 0.48 0.16 6 4 2 3 1 0.96 0.64 0.32 0.48 0.16 2  English Sanskrit Spanish Vietnamese Wolof 217 1 390 2 1 34.66 0.16 62.3 0.32 0.16 211 1 395 2 1 33.71 0.16 63.1 0.32 0.16 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. N/A Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families 1. All documents provided by the Department of Education of New York City containing critical information regarding their child’s education, including, but not limited to: September 2017 and throughout the year as needed. a. registration, application, and selection; b. standards and performance (e.g., standard text on report cards); Registration Material Parent Handbook Discipline Code Standard and Performance c. conduct, safety, and discipline; d. special education and related services; and e. transfers and discharges. How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. High incidence languages translated by the Department of Education's Language Translation Unit. Parent handbook is offered in English and Spanish. All communications with parents are translated into Spanish by our Parent Coordinator, School Secretary, or 3  2. All school documents related to Student Specific Issues including but not limited to students': Monthly Newsletter on the first of each month beginning in September of 2018. a. health; b. safety; c. legal or disciplinary matters; and d. entitlement to public education or placement in any Special Education, English Language Learner or non-standard academic program. 3. All school documents related to: Notice of parent workshops weekly, beginning in September of 2018. Monthly Newsletter on the first of each month beginning in September of 2018. a. School Meetings Spanish speaking paraprofessionals or teachers. All communications will be posted on WhizFish our Creston Academy School App for Android and iphone. All student specific documents are translated into appropriate languages using the DOE Language Translation Unit, or school personnel. An outside vendor is used for low incidence languages. All school documents are translated into Spanish by our Parent Coordinator, Bilingual teachers, or School Secretary. b. School Events c. School News d. School Announcements Notice of parent workshops weekly, beginning in September of 2018. Notifications of extracurricular programs, intervention programs, permission slips as needed, usually two weeks before program begins. All school documents will be posted on The Creston Academy School App. All documents related to Special Education Services including IEPs. Beginning in September of 2018 and throughout the year. IEPs and related documents are translated and explained orally by Spanish speaking members of the SBST, Arabic and Bengali speaking teachers. If other languages are required, an outside vendor is employed. 4  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide September and November of 2018. and March and May of 2019. Parent Teacher conferences including curriculum night are held four times per year during the following months: September, November, March and May. During these conferences in house personnel such as Parent Coordinator and/or bilingual teachers and paraprofessionals are assigned to different floors. These staff members translate for parents as needed. interpretation service(s)? Teachers , paraprofessionals, the parent coordinator, school aides, and the School Leadership Team provide these services. 5  An open house is held yearly for parents of current 5 th grade students. Translation is provided by in house personnel at this event and other monthly parent events. August 2018 Annual and Triennial IEP meetings Beginning in August of 2018 and continuing throughout the year Teachers, paraprofessionals, the SBST team, the parent coordinator, and school aides. Members of the SBST team, teachers, paraprofessionals, and outside vendors. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. We use School Messenger to communicate with parents in the event of a school emergency. We record messages in English, French, and Spanish. In the event of an emergency we would also translate the message into Bengali using our Bengali speaking teacher, and all other languages using a web-based translator.. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Chancellor's Regulation A-663 is reviewed with the staff at the opening Staff Conference on the first day teachers return by the principal. A copy of the regulation is included in the staff handbook. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The School will fulfill Section VII of Chancellor's Regulation A-663 by: providing each parent whose primary language is a covered language and who require language assistance services with a copy of the Bill of Parent Rights and Responsibilities which includes their rights regarding translation and 6  interpretation services. We will obtain translated versions of this document, in the covered languages, through http://schools.nyc.gov/RulesPolicies/ParentBillofRights/default.htm. B. The School posts in a conspicuous location at or near the primary entrance a sign in each of the covered languages, or most prominent covered languages, indicating the availability of interpretation services. A list of staff members who are able to assist with interpretation and tranlsation is available to all staff, including the school's safety officers. We will obtain such translated signs, in the covered language through http://schools.nyc.gov/Offices/Translation/TipsandResources/Default.htm. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Feedback for quality and availability of services will be gathered from Learning environment surveys and parent involvement meetings with Parent coordinator. We also have a school app, WhizFish which enables us to text parents push notifications in all languages. 7 
