 12X511 School Name: BRONX ENVISION ACADEMY Principal: EMILY SHU   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Number (DBN): 12X511 Bronx Envision Academy 3212000011511 9-12 1619 Boston Road, Bronx, NY 10460 (718) 589-1590 Phone Number: (718) 589-1595 Fax: Emily Shu eshu@schools.nyc.gov School Contact Person: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Geographical District: 12 Superintendent’s Office Address: Email Address: Emily Shu Daniel Burke Flavia Cruz Julian Rondon Brenda McGhee N/A District Information Michael Alcoff Superintendent: 2 MetrotechCenter Brooklyn, NY 11201 malcoff@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-935-3068 Phone Number: 718-935-5780 Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Executive Director’s Office Address: Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, NY 10458 1230 Zerega Ave, Bronx, NY 10462 Jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: (718) 828-7776 Phone Number: (718) 828-6280 Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Emily Shu Daniel Burke FlaviaCruz Lillian Nieves Brenda McGhee Raven Garcia EnmanuelBaez Julian Rondon Nicole Wolf Daniel Vega *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ Teacher Member/ Teacher Member/ Parent   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) RondellDarden Sophia Blom Member/ Parent Member/ Parent Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview The mission of Bronx Envision Academy is to empower students to be passionate about and well-prepared for their futures, enabling them to be successful in college and their careers. Bronx Envision will support student success through a challenging arts-rich curriculum and intensive internship experiences in collaboration with vibrant community arts organizations. At Bronx Envision, imagination is the key to   success, and the learning process in all academic disciplines will mirror the artistic process of skill-building, in-depth investigation, integration of ideas from disparate sources, and process of critique, feedback and reflection. Bronx Envision teachers will design courses that link students to the unique and varied arts institutions that make New York City a magnet for creativity and arts professions. As the school grows, Bronx Envision itself will become a public hub for the arts, with student-run gallery exhibitions and performances open to students, their families, and the community. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Bronx Envision Academy supports 444 students in grades 9-12. Register data as of September 2018 is included below: Total Student Population School Level High School 444 100% 444 195 43.92% 249 56.08% Gender Male Female Ethnicity 278 62.61% Hispanic 5 American Indian or Alaskan Native Asian 3 Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander 4 Black White Multi-racial Not Reported English Language Learners (ELL) ELL Special Education (Total students with IEPs ) 138 31.08% 11 2.48% 0 5 1.13% 0.68% 0.9% 0% 1.13% 72 16.22% 105 23.65% The attendance rate for 2017-2018 was 83%. Our students have the opportunity to take a 10-credit sequence in visual art, dance or theater to earn an Arts Endorsed Regents Diploma. Partnerships Bronx Envision Academy’s partners bring a variety of opportunities to our students and school community. Key partners include: 0  College Bound Initiative (full time college counseling, coordinated trips, information sessions for parents, support for college application and financial aid process) Institute for Student Achievement (coaching and curriculum development for faculty) The Foros Group (business and entrepreneurship class, career development support, internships) Park Avenue Armory, (artist residencies, performance and exhibition opportunities to expand arts learning and integrate the arts across the curriculum) Community Word Project, (artist residencies) Visual Thinking Strategies, (teacher professional development) Great Books Foundation, (teacher professional development focused on shared inquiry) Ramapo for Children, (teacher professional development focused on creating a supportive school environment) 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Student Population English Language Learners (Scores below include returning students who tested at Bronx Envision Academy in spring 2018):  4 Entering  8 Emerging  23 Expanding  12 Transitioning  6 Commanding Special Education Percent of students with IEPs at this school who: receive Related Services only spend less than 20% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services spend between 21 and 59% of the week receiving Special Education classroom services 39 37.14% 56 53.33% spend >60% of their week in Integrated Co-Teaching (ICT) classes 105 23.65% 4 6 3.81% 5.71% 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. 1  Framework for Great Schools Bronx Envision Academy has demonstrated progress in Effective School Leadership, Supportive Environment, Trust, Collaborative Teachers, and Rigorous Instruction, as measured by the 2018 Quality Review. Despite continued growth in Rigorous Instruction, this remains an area of focus for our school community for 2018-2019. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 12X511 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 429 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 4 4 8 7 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 9 9 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) 3 5 School Composition (2017-18) 88.0% % Attendance Rate 86.0% % Reduced Lunch 14.5% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.9% 59.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 2.8% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 4% 21% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 69% 40% 64.8% 1.1% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A YSH N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 91 89 2 83.6% 2.1% 24.7% 33.3% 2.3% 1.9% 2 29% 8 N/A N/A 58% 53% 78.6% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Based on our Regents examination results in 2017-2018, we continued to prioritize support for Global History and Living Environment. Despite growth in Living Environment scores in January 2018 for students retaking the exam and improved scores for ninth grade first-time test takers, 10th graders re-taking the exam in June 2018 scored low compared to peers. Our January 2018 scores for students retaking the Global History were low, and changes to the exam in June 2018 and additional anticipated changes for 2019 testing make this an area for further inquiry. Our English Regents pass rate remained strong. While our 2018 Quality Review noted that Bronx Envision Academy was proficient or well developed in all rated areas, we would like to strengthen work in the instructional core, particularly in teacher pedagogy and coherent curricula. Strengths Strong Common Core English Regents Scores Strong curriculum, accessible for a variety of learners and aligned to standards Strong teacher team practices in peer-reviewing projects, units, and assignments Introduction of Shared Inquiry close reading and discussion strategies in English, History, and Science courses Rigorous Research Presentations & Portfolio Roundtable Process After school, Saturday, and Summer Regents Preparation Sessions Improved feedback and clear expectations for students Increased participation in Advanced Placement courses Priority Needs Aligned and coherent strategies for annotation across grade levels and content areas. 4  Stronger use of rubrics to articulate clear expectations for high quality student work across classrooms (Superintendent feedback). Stronger supports for student engagement in discussion. Increased alignment of writing process supports across the curriculum. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, students will demonstrate improved critical thinking skills by making progress toward graduation requirements, as measured by a 10% improvement in history and science Regents pass rates compared to the 2017-2018 school year results. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Support development of benchmark writing assessments across curriculum with support of Institute for Student Achievement coach. Provide twice monthly coaching from ISA coach throughout the year. Teachers Summer 2018-June 2019 Principal; ISA Coach; Department Facilitator Teacher Leaders Support key groups of teachers (new-to-BEA teachers, ninth grade team, and history and English teachers) with professional development support focused on Shared Inquiry, in partnership with the Great Books Foundation. Provide academic intervention coursework for incoming 9th grade students struggling with literacy skills (September-June). Create small group academic support for Living Environment 9th grade students entering far below proficiency. Students struggling with literacy and numeracy Create new Global History literacy intensive course for tenth grade students in advance of first examination attempt in June 2019. September 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Great Books PD Facilitator; Principal; LPP Model Teachers Assistant Principal & Special Education, English, Social Studies, and ENL Teachers Provide after school and Saturday Regents Preparation support, with strong recruitment for ELL students Analyze Regents Exam data in department teams as part of inquiry cycle to refine and adapt curriculum and academic interventions. Provide professional development support via BFSC for subject area teachers (with focus on Living Environment). Host curriculum night, parent-advisor conferences, and family workshops about college readiness and high school graduation requirements, including training on the use of Pupilpath/Skedula for tracking student progress. Provide growth mindset training for families. Utilize Kinvolved system to improve communication about attendance and student performance. Teachers Families Summer 2018-June 2019 Principal & Department Facilitator Teacher Leaders September 2018- May 2019 Principal, IEP Coordinator & Guidance Department 6 Coordinate special education services and collaborate with families to ensure appropriate supports for students with disabilities 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. To engage families, we will: August Ninth Grade New Family Orientation (including information about 9th grade courses, grading and homework policy, and expectations for high school) September Curriculum Night - host grade-level workshops with parents about curriculum and expectations, including training in grading policy/homework policy, Pupilpath/Skedula, AP workshops, college process workshops, and information about tutoring and supports for students (Point People: Grade Team Leaders, CBI Director of College Counseling, Parent Coordinator, Principal and Assistant Principal, Teachers) October Host Guidance Workshop about college readiness, types of diplomas, and requirements for graduation, scheduled to align with Parent Association Meeting (Point People: Guidance Counselor, CBI Director of College Counseling, Parent Coordinator, Principal) Host Student-Led Parent-Teacher conferences with Advisor (Teacher Teams/Advisors) November-February Host workshops focused on: Study Skills, Understanding the Regents, AP courses, College Application Process, Financial Aid (Point People: CBI Director of College Counseling, Parent Coordinator, AP for All Peer Collaborative Teacher, Principal, Guidance Department) March Host Parent-Teacher Conferences with advisors (Teacher Teams/Advisors) March-May Host Portfolio Roundtables (9th & 10th Grade), Junior Research Presentations (11th Grade) and Senior Capstone Presentations (12th Grade) with parent invitations Host Evening of Excellence Awards Event Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment 7  Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources: TL – Salary (additional special education teachers, model teacher positions) TL LPP funds - Salary for two model teacher positions & per session TL Vision funds - Planning support and Instructional Cabinet meetings for teacher leaders (grade team leaders & department facilitators) Title I SWP – Salary Data Specialist Funds – Per Session for data analysis Title III - Regents Preparation for ELL and SIFE students Schedule Adjustments (Summer Planning) Instructional Resources: Title I SWP - Consultant Coaching PD Title I SWP - Skedula/Pupilpath Software Title I SWP - Kinvolved Software Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A X C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind X Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, 15% of test takers who failed the Global History Regents exam in June 2018 will earn a passing score on the Transition Regents and 15% of test takers who previously failed the Living Environment Regents exam will earn a passing score. The January 2019 Regents provide an opportune mid-point benchmark to measure progress toward increasing Regents pass rates, and the February 2019 Chancellor’s Professional Development Day provides an opportunity for department team reflection on curriculum, interventions, and assessment data. In February 2019 on Professional Development Day, we will compare January 2017, 2018 and 2019 pass rates and compare the scores for students who took exams multiple times, including the January 2019 Regents. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) 8  To measure progress, teacher teams will review ATS REDS and RADI reports for January Regents exams. Additional data consulted: Performance Series reading level data and attendance data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 9  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? 1. Strengths Student attendance improved to 83.5% in 2017-2018 from 81%, which was the approximate rate for at least two years, impacting student time on task in the classroom. Chronically absent rates dropped from 50% to 44% in 2017-2018. Data Source: ATS Attendance data and NYC School Quality Guide 2. Needs: Continued focus on chronically absent students to reduce rate of chronic absenteeism. (44%) Continued focus on first period attendance, impacting credit accumulation rates for students (See Performance Dashboard data) Continued focus on overall student attendance (83.5%) 3. Policies and Practices to Support the Whole Child Attendance team, chaired by assistant principal, identifies students struggling with attendance and provides personal outreach and interventions. Teacher teams, including advisors, conduct outreach and make follow-up phone calls. Use of Kinvolved software for attendance record keeping and text-based communication to families Improved public celebrations of strong attendance, including weekly competitions between grade team advisories Social worker and guidance counselor coordinate twelve mailings of attendance letters and RISA attendance reports annually. Automated phone calls notify parents of absences and latenesses PBIS rewards and certificates for students with excellent attendance 0  Second semester introduction of before-school Work-and-Play program Improved alignment of attendance team work with advisor/grade team efforts Additional public celebrations of strong attendance Additional home visits and interventions for chronically absent students Expansion of before-school programs to promote on-time attendance Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, school wide attendance will improve by 2% and the chronically absent rate will decrease by 5% as measured by Bronx Envision Academy’s Annual Attendance Report. 1  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Weekly Attendance Team Meetings and Monitoring/Communication about progress to Grade Teams, Professional Development in Skedula for documenting parent outreach (September) Chronically absent students September 2018 – June 2019 Assistant Principal, Parent Coordinator & Attendance Team Reassignment of point people from Attendance team for specific advisories and grade teams (August-September) Workshop for Parents (September) Identification of new ways to effectively communicate with families about attendance (September) Professional Development for Attendance Team in iLog, 407, Kinvolved, and Phone Messenger Tools Professional Development for teachers regarding attendance procedures, data tools (Skedula and ATS reports), and progress to school-wide attendance goal (September, December, February) Communication with grade teams focused on subgroups (chronically absent students, students with disabilities, ELLs, and students in temporary housing) Grade Team Parent Weekly Outreach In 2017-2018, teacher teams met for Parent Outreach responsibilities once weekly from 2:40-3:20. In 2018-2019, the teams will integrate with a point person from the attendance team for each team to improve alignment of supports, and the time for this work will be expanded to 2:40-3:55. Attendance Reports and PBIS Certificates We provide RISAs to families 11 times per year and conduct individual family meetings (with guidance counselor, social worker or attendance teacher) for students who are chronically absent, including information about Common Core-aligned Families of Students with 75-85% attendance September 2018-June 2019 Principal & Teacher Grade Team Leaders, Grade Teams All Students September 2018-June 2019 Social Worker & Guidance Counselor 2 instruction at Bronx Envision Academy and the importance of regular attendance to meet college-readiness standards. Attendance Intervention Home Visits and Meetings Families of Chronically absent students September 2018-June 2019 Attendance Teacher, Social Worker & Guidance Counselor 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Renewed staff training in Kinvolved (texting and parent communication platform) and Parent Orientation to Kinvolved, Curriculum Night, September Grade Team weekly parent outreach opportunities Attendance record mailing 5x/year (5 report cards and 6 progress report mailings) Attendance letter focused on standards for attendance (90%+) with detailed information for families, October & March Conferences Guidance Workshop, October 2018 Parent-Teacher Conference Attendance Review, October & March Guidance Outreach and Conferences, Ongoing Evening of Excellence Awards, May Parent Teacher Conference Attendance Award Certificates (6x/year, with Marking Period Report Cards) Weekly Announcements for Advisory Attendance Competition with Monthly Award for Top Advisory promoted to full school Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources TL – Salary (guidance, school aide, Assistant Principal, teacher) Title I – Salary AIDP Attendance Funds - Attendance Teacher Salary 3  Instructional Resources Title III – Programs to engage English Language Learners, including Regents Preparation for ELLs Schedule Adjustments TL - Salary (addition of professional responsibility for parent outreach for teachers) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, attendance rates, as measured by the PAR, will increase by 2% over the September-January attendance rate during the 2017-2018 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. PAR, Daily attendance records, anecdotal logs Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In Bronx Envision Academy’s 2018 Quality Review, we were rated well developed in 4.2 Engage in structured professional collaborations on teams using an inquiry approach that promotes shared leadership and focused on improved student learning. In 2.2 Align assessments to curricula, use on-going assessment and grading practices, and analyze information on student learning outcomes to adjust instructional decisions at the team and classroom levels, we were rated well developed. Teacher feedback regarding opportunities for in-school collaboration and trust in the 2018 School Survey was positive. Our teacher teams met using a revised inquiry process that included a shared problem of practice, development of curriculum, revision of unit plans and exhibitions, and analysis of student work. In last year's CEP, we prioritized providing opportunities for teachers to learn from colleagues in other schools via the Learning Partners Program, AP for All, and College Access for All. We utilized these programs to strengthen our teacher teams and professional learning, resulting in the introduction of The Great Books Foundation's methodology and feedback rounds as we crafted teacher intervisitation plans for the 2018-2019 school year. Based on student performance on the Global History Regents, we have prioritized analysis of student writing and discussion in the History Department as an area of focus for the 2018-2019 school year, resulting in an expanded faculty from 3 teachers to 5 teachers for the 2018-2019 school year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, as a result of continued professional development about our instructional focus (access to high-level student-to-student discussion for all students) and participation in critical friends group inter-visitation triads, at least 80% of teachers will earn end of year Advance MOTP ratings of Effective or Highly Effective in components 3b and 3c, as measured by end of year Advance MOTP ratings. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). At Summer Leadership Institute, teacher leaders will collaborate with school coach, principal, an assistant principal to create a strong cycle for feedback and support for unit planning and assessment planning for the 2018-2019 school year, prioritizing both interdisciplinary learning opportunities (Exhibition Workshops) and department-based learning opportunities (Unit Plans and Looking at Student Work Protocols). The Learning Partners teacher leader teams will create draft calendars for professional development in July and complete protocols for intervisitation by August 2018. Beginning with Summer Planning, teachers will engage in inquiry work focused on student-to-student discussion, analyzing unit plans and assessments to identify areas of strength, gaps in student achievement, and identify priority units of study for work-shopping and development. Teachers will meet once per marking period (six times per year) for intervisitation pre-visit protocols, followed by the intervisitation and a debrief, submitting reflections and lesson documentations via google drive. Teacher inquiry groups Principal and Assistant Principal provide feedback for all teachers in Goal Setting conference, Mid-Year Conference, and End of Year conference caseload. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teacher Teams June 2018-August 2018 Principal & teacher leaders (Summer Leadership Institute) LPP Team (July & August) September - June Teacher teams, August Principal and Assistant Principal with all teachers. Teachers will share best practices in grade team and full faculty professional development workshops focused on discussion, led by LPP model teachers, with a focus on literacy skill development (via Shared Inquiry) and access for English Language Learners and students with disabilities. Teacher grade teams and full faculty November, January, April, June Principal & Teacher Leaders Teachers will analyze student progress to identify areas of strength and areas for development, with particular attention to students in the lowest third, students with disabilities, and English Language Learners. Teacher teams June 2018 – July 2019 Principal & Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement 6  How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teacher grade teams will coordinate Curriculum Night workshops for parents (September) Advisors will provide outreach, schedule, and host Parent-Teacher Conferences (October & March) Principal will provide workshop for Portfolio Roundtables (April-May) Teacher teams will conduct outreach and host meetings with parents as part of the Kid Talk grade team process (September-June) Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources TL – Salary, Per Session for Department Facilitators for Planning and Professional Development TL Learning Partners - Model Teacher Funding Title I – Salary TL Vision for School Improvement – Per session for Teacher Team Leaders Instructional Resources Title I - Professional Development and Coaching (ISA and Great Books Foundation) Schedule Adjustments Per session paid for Summer Planning Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By February 2019, all teachers will share reflections via school-wide protocol on three inter-visitations from first semester during mid-year conferences and leadership team will review Advance ratings in 3B and 3C for progress toward 80% effective or highly effective goal. 7  Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance teacher observation data, components 3B and 3C Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Advance data shows improvement in 3B discussion and questioning during the 2017-2018 school year. 3B and 3C lag behind components in domain 2 and 4, however, resulting in a continued need to focus on discussion and engagement Bronx Envision Academy provided teacher-led and Great Books Foundation-led professional development workshops and Institute for Student Achievement and Field Support Center Instructional Lead coaching for teachers in areas of focus, as identified in teacher evaluations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. School leaders will provide timely, aligned feedback for 100% of school teachers, as measured by the Advance online rating system, with targeted supports for teachers that include mentoring, individualized coaching, and leadership opportunities based on teacher needs and interests. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Analysis of teacher practice ratings to develop professional development plan, including weekly analysis by Principal and Assistant Principal, with four times yearly support from Teacher Development and Evaluation coach and four times yearly support from Leadership Academy coach. Goal Setting Conferences: Teachers will create student achievement goals in preparation for the Initial Planning Conference. We will return to the goals at the mid-year and summative end-of-year conference. All teachers All teachers Mid-Year Conferences: modified consultancy protocol for all teachers. All teachers Summer, Ongoing throughout school year September & October 2018 January & February 2019 End of Year Conferences: Teacher-led conference All teachers June 2019 Principal & Assistant Principal Principal & Assistant Principal Principal & Assistant Principal Principal & Assistant Principal 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will outline key areas of focus in curriculum and instruction during the following parent workshops: August: New Family Orientation September: Curriculum Night October: Guidance Workshop & Parent Teacher Conference February: Mid-Year Letter to Families March: Parent-Teacher Conference April-May: Portfolio Roundtable Workshop 0  Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Human Resources TL - Salary (Principal and Assistant Principal, Teacher Mentors) Instructional Resources Title I - Coaching for Principal and Assistant Principal Title I - ISA Instructional Coaching to support teachers based on Principal and Assistant Principal feedback Schedule Adjustments TL - Salary (Principal and Assistant Principal) Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By mid-year, February 2019, school leaders will complete 50% of teacher evaluations, as measured by the Advance Teacher Rating System. Principal and Assistant Principal will review all Advance data twice monthly with a goal of completing 75% of required observations by the end of April, and 100% of required observations for Measures of Teacher Practice ratings by June 2018. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports; goal-setting, mid-year, and end-of-year reports Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. Bronx Envision Academy's Parent Coordinator was on leave for several months during 2017-2018, and we look forward to a strong year with full-time support in 2018-2019. The school welcomes parents for 20-minute conferences with advisors and enjoys strong parent participation at major events, such as the Evening of Excellence, the Winter Concert, the Spring Concert, the Spring DJ Club Concert, and the School Play. New Parent Orientation is also well-attended. Participation is stronger at Parent Conferences in the fall than it is in the spring, however, our 11th grade teacher team increased participation by scheduling student research presentations during conferences so that parents could attend. Our College Bound Initiative Director of College Counseling hosted three large-scale parent workshops during the 2017-2018 school year, including sessions about financial aid (in English and in Spanish) and the college application process. Parent Association events and guidance workshops were more sparsely attended. Priority needs include increasing access for all parents, particularly parents who speak a language other than English. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, Bronx Envision Academy will increase participation at school family events by 10% and introduce coordinated volunteer opportunities, as measured by parent coordinator activity reports. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Combine Parent Association meetings with well-attended events such as Evening of Excellence or Financial Aid College Night. Develop workshops to support parents in understanding the college process, graduation requirements, Regents exam format, and supports for their children. Families Provide additional time in teacher schedules for parent outreach and communication with families and tool for parent outreach (Kinvolved). Teachers Develop new family workshops and performances with expanded performing arts department. Full School September 2018-May 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Parent Coordinator, College Bound Initiative Director of College Counseling Principal Principal, Guidance Department, Arts Department, Advisors, Grade Teams Develop new student-led conference protocol for Parent-Teacher Conferences and conduct outreach for Portfolio Roundtables, Junior Research Presentations & Senior Capstone Seminars. Provide Spanish Language Interpretation and Translation for parent events and communication. Review attendance data following each Parent event (Curriculum Night, Parent-Teacher Conferences, PA Meetings, Portfolio Roundtables, Evening of Excellence, Concerts) and revise communication strategies and calendar dates based on assessment of attendance and participation 3b – Parent and Family Engagement Spanish-speaking Families September 2018-June 2019 Families September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Bilingual guidance counselor, community associate Principal, Assistant Principal, Community Associate, Guidance Counselor and Social Worker If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 3  Human Resources TL – Salaries TL - Translation Funds Instructional Resources Title I – College Bound Initiative Partnership Arts for ELLs and Students With Disabilities Grant – Arts programs and performances Schedule Adjustments Title I Parent Engagement Funds Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Parent participation in school events will increase by 10% by February 2019, as measured by the Parent Coordinator Activity Report for September-January compared to September 2017-January 2018. Principal and parent coordinator will make adjustments to the calendar based on parent participation and preferences. The SLT will review parent participation data at least four times annually. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Parent Coordinator Activity Report Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Mathematics Science Social Studies At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) Far below proficiency on 8 th Grade ELA or low reading level as assessed through Performance Series baseline Far below proficiency of 8 th Grade Math or failed Algebra Regents Far below proficiency on 8 th Grade Science or failed Living Environment Regents Far below proficiency on 8 th Grade ELA, low reading level as assessed through Performance Series or failed History Regents exam Demonstrated need, referral from faculty or parent request Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Small group literacy Intervention, scaffolded writing assignments; pre-teaching, re-teaching, scaffolding through graphic organizers and other supports Math small group instruction, Saturday Regents Preparation Project-based, writing intensive supplemental course, iLearn blended learning Office Hours, Writing-intensive supplemental course Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) Small group When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) During the school day, after school/extended day Small group During the school day, Saturday Small group During the school day Small group After School & During the school day Counseling Small group and one-to-one During the school day 5  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 15 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. non-mandated counseling, school supplies, after school academic support Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). N/A 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 6  N/A 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. N/A 7  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Recruitment: ● Attendance at hiring fairs focused on highly qualified teachers. ● Development of hiring committee that includes current faculty and staff. ● Development of consistent interview and hiring process (rubrics for reviewing resumes and curriculum documents, development of interview protocols, and system for demonstration lessons and ways to incorporate student feedback) ● Web based recruitment for job openings (including the Department of Education’s New Teacher Finder and independent online employment sites). ● Outreach to local universities’ career offices. Retention: ● Emphasis on teacher collaboration, grade level teams, curriculum development support, leadership opportunities, creation of elective classes. ● Staff participation in school based decision making process, including hiring committee. Support: ● Strong mentoring for new teachers, supported by partnership with New York City Teaching Fellows focused on development of early career highly qualified teachers. ● Coaching support for English, History, and Science teachers through the Great Books Foundation. 8  ● Coaching support for content area teachers in science, math, history, and English, provided through partnership with the Institute for Student Achievement. ● Literacy coaching support for teachers provided by highly qualified teacher leader. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). ● Identification of independent and Department of Education-sponsored professional development opportunities. ● Use of TL Vision for School Improvement funds to support teacher professional development activities. ● Visual Thinking Strategies and Community Word Project (in-class residencies to create arts-integrated CCLS-aligned projects). ● Additional training and professional development opportunities through partner organization Institute for Student Achievement. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. n/a 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). n/a Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). Not applicable. 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments 9  Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. Teacher leaders participate in weekly instructional cabinet meetings, twice weekly grade team meetings, and at least twice monthly department meetings where they have the opportunity to suggest, select, and revise assessment measures. In addition, teachers participate in the school MOSL committee. Professional development includes coaching and weekly faculty meetings focused on instructional improvement inquiry and analysis of student work. Data specialist and TL Vision for School Improvement funds support teacher leaders in leading and engaging in professional development regarding assessment measures. The UFT consultation committee meets regularly to provide feedback about professional development, assessment, and instruction. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D & 5E part 4a and 4b n/a Sections 5A, 5B part 4a and 4b n/a Sections 5A, 5B, 5C, 5D & 5E part 4a and 4b Title I Part A (Basic) Federal Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Federal Federal Title III, Immigrant Federal Tax Levy (FSF) Local 376,710 0 12,366 0 3,541,451 x n/a x n/a x 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools 0  may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. 1   IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.  Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 2  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Bronx Envision Academy, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Bronx Envision Academy’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The Bronx Envision Academy community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of our school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by Bronx Envision Academy. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students Bronx Envision Academy will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3  ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of our school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, Bronx Envision Academy will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to schools to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in our Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend our school and will work to ensure that our school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the Every Student Succeeds Act. 4  ● schedule additional parent meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Bronx Envision Academy will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; hosting the Evening of Excellence and other Family events; establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; hosting events to support, men asserting leadership in education for their children. parents/guardians, grandparents and foster parents; encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand; School-Parent Compact (SPC) Bronx Envision Academy,n compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: 5  ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by theEvery Student Succeeds Act. Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● hosting Curriculum Night and family information sessions related to the college application and financial aid process; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 6  ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences, Curriculum Night, the Evening of Excellence, and information sessions regarding College Bound Initiative; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Every Student Succeeds Act.Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities  monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent;  ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games;     promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits;  encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child;   participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education;  communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested;   become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact;  participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department  learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 7   share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 8  Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components:  Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. o The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need o These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. o Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. o Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers.  High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” o Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences.  Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. o These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 9  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information 3 2 1 Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the rationale   subgroups and grade levels of students to be served  schedule and duration  language of instruction  # and types of certified teachers  types of materials Begin description here: We will provide after school whole class instruction with a focus on English language development and Regents preparation for Global History, English, and Science. The subgroup will be our ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth grade ELL students, with a particular focus on those who are undercredited or who have not yet successfully passed required Regents examinations. We have selected this group because they have struggled with passing required Regents examinations. For example, only one (of twenty three) has passed the Global History and Geography Regents examination only two have passed a science Regents examination, two have passed the English examination, and three have passed mathematics. Two certified ESL teachers and a content area teacher will provide instruction. The total number of hours budgeted for the program is 143. 63 Hours: We anticipate that each of three teachers will offer 21 hours of instruction 2:41-3:41 pm weekly from January until June. (Global History: ESL/History Dual Certified Teacher, 15 10th-12th grade students, 21 sessions, day of week to be determined, see materials below.) (Science: ESL Teacher and Science Teacher, 25-30 9th-12th grade students, 21 sessions, day of week to be determined, see materials below.) 80 Hours: We will offer ten additional four hour sessions with two teachers on Saturdays before exam administration. (ESL Teacher and Social Studies Teacher, 25-30 10th-12th grade students, 10 sessions, 9 am - 1 pm, Saturday, see materials below) 12/10, 12/17, 1/7, 1/14, 4/29, 5/6, 5/13, 5/20, 6/3, 6/10 Supporting materials will include translation dictionaries, alternate language books, and multi-media supports, including online literacy support. Teachers utilize a range of materials to create study materials and courses. Records of student attendance will be maintained with the payroll secretary. Program notification documentation will be maintained by the Parent Coordinator. 0  Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. rationale teachers to receive training    schedule and duration   name of provider topics to be covered Begin description here: Our professional development program is based on collaboration and is based on our Annual Goals and Instructional Core Values. The program teachers will participate in weekly professional development sessions, co-planning sessions, coaching, and other on-site PD. Weekly workshops take place on Mondays from 2:40-4:00. Topics include: Scholarship Data and Action Plans for Struggling Students Co-Teaching Models Effective Lesson Planning Project WorkshopsLiteracy Development Support for English Language Learners We will provide additional PD support for ENL and content area teachers in supporting ELLs via the Bronx Borough Field Support Center (Holly Reichert). This work will directly support teachers working in the Title III program with support for building academic language and introducing supports to provide access for ELLs and all learners. Professional development attendance will be maintained in the PD binder. Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. rationale   schedule and duration   name of provider  how parents will be notified of these activities topics to be covered Begin description here: Our Parent Coordinator, Bilingual Guidance Counselor, and College Bound Initiative Director of College Counseling support the Parent Association with the coordination of events for parents and families. Parent engagement activities occur primarily in the evening and on Saturdays, based on preference from the parent community. Activities include extensive outreach for Curriculum Night and Parent-Teacher Conferences (which are arranged through 20-minute appointments). Other events include 90 minute workshops (1 in September, 1 in October, and 2 in the spring - provided by guidance staff Ariella Torres, Alanna Cheyney, and College Bound Initiative Director of College Counseling Gina Jones), awards assemblies (March and June), student performances (December and May), and Portfolio Roundtable Reviews (spring). The events were selected based on review of school survey data and event attendance data from 2011-2016. All events are one-two hours in length, except Curriculum Night and Conferences, which are three hours. 1 Part D: Parental Engagement Activities This semester, we will offer a college application session for parents and a financial aid information session for parents with a Spanish language workshop room. Next semester, we will offer a college application and FAFSA information session for parents (dates to be determined). Our Parent Coordinator, Community Associate, Bilingual Guidance Counselor, and College Bound Initiative Director of College Counseling provide translation and interpretation support for these meetings to facilitate participation among parents of Title III students. We utilize automated phone messaging, mailings (every three weeks), regular phone outreach, and our website to notify parents of these activities. We maintain records of the agendas, attendance, and invitations on file in the Parent Coordinator's office. Our parent coordinator also records this information in the PCAR system. Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits)  Per session  Per diem Purchased services  High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. Supplies and materials  Must be supplemental.  Additional curricula, instructional materials.  Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 2  3  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 12 School Name Bronx Envision Academy Borough Bronx School Number 511 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Emily Shu Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Daniel Burke Teacher/Subject Area Eduvigen Mella, Special Educ Teacher/Subject Area Related-Service Provider Maxine St Louis, Speech Superintendent Assistant Principal Angel Bookal Coach School Counselor Ariella Torres Parent Flavia Cruz Parent Coordinator Luisa DeJesus Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 1 3 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 4  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 421 Total number of ELLs 65 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 15.44% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 3 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? English teachers utilize Scantron Performance Series to determine students' reading levels at the beginning and end of the year. This provides a Lexile grade level for each student. The ENL teacher utilizes Reading Plus, which includes literacy skill assessments for all entering and emerging ELL students. We administer a baseline assessment in Reading Plus in September, and the online program provides data throughout the year. The results from both assessments strongly aligns to the results from the NYSESLAT and NYSITELL, with entering and emerging students scoring in the low elementary Lexile grade level. This data informs our design of additional ENL instruction for entering and emerging ELL students in all grades. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 5  Our English department and grade teams support analysis of student data for use in designing curriculum and supports for students. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We review the progress of students in earning credits, passing required Regents examinations, attendance, and NYSESLAT scores. We utilize this data at the end of the summer to place students in classes to meet their needs, including advisory and academic intervention courses. Our ENL team recommends changes to the program via a review process in the spring. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Our teams review summative data, including ISAs for Regents and results from NYSESLAT and other assessments when they become available in the summer, and our ENL teachers facilitate the understanding of this data to support colleagues across disciplines. School leadership and ENL teachers meet with guidance team to determine appropriate supports and plan new programs for English Language Learners. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Teacher teams review student progress on English proficiency tests and provide additional supports based on that analysis. For example, students may participate in AIS study groups with ENL teachers or with content area teachers depending on their needs. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Among students who tested in Spring 2017, 2 scored at the entering level, 5 at the emerging level, 16 at the transitioning level, 20 at the expanding level, and 2 at the commanging level. Our students scoring at the entering level are newcomer ELLs in the 10th grade. We have fewer than 5 students per year who require the NYSITELL, therefore, we utilize the individual student's NYSITELL results to inform decisions for that student. Please note: We do not have NYSITELL or 2017 NYSESLAT scores for all students due to long term absences, resulting in a lower number of students represented in Section III data than in the total number of ELL students for the school. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our ENL teacher team (2 at the start of the year, and 3 as of mid-year) meets with guidance and leadership to identify school-level and course offering changes. Our ENL teachers work with specific grade teams and with the English department to analyze results and design curriculum and supports. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. For all students: Push-in ENL in English Class and History Class, with heterogeneous grouping within each grade. INTEGRATED MODEL For entering and emerging students: Additional Pull-Out ENL elective period class, representing homogeneous grouping. Two sections exist: one for ninth and tenth graders and another for eleventh and twelfth graders. STAND ALONE MODEL 6  b. TBE program. If applicable. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? We offer 540 minutes of instruction for entering students (360 minutes push-in ENL in English and History and 180 minutes pull-out ENL), 360 for emerging students (180 minutes push-in ENL English and History and 180 minutes pull-out ENL), 180 for transitioning and expanding students (push-in) in English and History, and 180 (push-in) in English and History for commanding students. All ELLs are programmed accordingly in STARS. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Bronx Envision Academy offers ENL instruction with three certified English as a Second Language teachers. They co-plan and co-teach English and History curriculum with content area teachers, providing small group instruction, scaffolded texts, and support with vocabulary development approaches. In pull-out instruction, the ENL teacher uses a blended learning approach, including thematic units to support Regents-aligned vocabulary development and Reading Plus software and online learning. Our ENL teachers have led professional development for colleagues regarding language development and instructional supports. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We provide proficiency examinations in home languages with the support of our bilingual special education teacher as part of regular classroom instruction. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status We do not currently serve more than a couple SIFE students, but we have provided additional AIS support for literacy skills based on assessment of our few SIFE students' needs. Our newcomer ELLs have significant support with vocabulary development and reading via English language software and instruction. We provide translated materials and glossaries and audio supports for reading. We also provide after school tutoring in math and science, targeted for our 9th and 10th grade newcomer ELLs who are preparing for the Algebra and Living Environment examination. Our developing ELLs utilize Reading Plus and graphic organizers and glossaries for language development. Long term ELLs utilize some of the materials but, like former ELLs, primarily utilize standard materials, with consultation and support of the ENL teacher. We recently hired a new ENL teacher to expand class support for former ELLs, particularly those studying Advanced Placement English. We continue to provide ELL testing accommodations for two years after students exit ELL status. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Bronx Envision Academy has hired a special education teacher with a bilingual extension to provide additional support in math and science for ninth grade ELL-SWD with small group instruction, tutoring, and alternative and parallel teaching in ICT classes. She also provides after school tutoring in math and science with native language support and English vocabulary instruction for newcomer Spanish speakers preparing for the Algebra and Living Environment exams. ENL teachers collaborate with English and History special education teachers to support ELL-SWDs through small group instruction and Reading Plus computer 7  software. We utilize audio books, glossaries, and graphic organizers to support ELL-SWDs. We consult with the special education department to ensure alignment between each student's special education and ENL supports. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Our two ENL teachers serve as advisors, co-teachers, and teachers of pull-out ENL courses. We utilize a schedule that allows students with disabilities, including ELL-SWDs to have full-time, part-time, and SETSS-based special education services. The schedule allows the special education and ENL departments to adjust student schedules and services based on a student's progress and IEP as he or she progresses through grades in the school. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. 9 th Grade: Push-In ENL in English and History, Pull-Out ENL for entering and emerging ELLs, Special Ed Bilingual support in Math/Science for ELL-SWDs. 10 th Grade: Push-In ENL in English and History, Pull-Out ENL for entering and emerging ELLS, after school tutoring for math and science. 11 th Grade: Push-In ENL in English and Advisory, Pull-Out ENL Global History, ENL Advisory. 12 th Grade: Push-In ENL in English and History, Pull-Out ENL Global History, Additional support for former ELLs through expanded co-teaching and electives. Targeted interventions for ELA and social studies: ENL small group AIS instruction and lunch club support Targeted interventions for math and science: pull out small group exam preparation and vocabulary work, Saturday Regents preparation. Native language support provided via bilingual special education math/science teacher. We recommend services and programs based on review of students' academic and assessment records. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? We have hired an additional ENL teacher to provide an array of supports for 11th and 12th grade ELLs and to facilitate additional supports for our newcomer ELL students. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? No programs will be discontinued for the 2017-2018 school year. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. We promote Regents preparation programs for all students, with particular recruitment among our ELLs. We provide after school tutoring in math and science for ELLs with our bilingual special education teacher and small group Regents preparation for ELLs on Saturdays and in the summer. Our schedule includes two elective periods for all students. Although pull-out ENL takes up one of the elective periods, ELLs have the opportunity to select arts and other elective courses for the remaining elective period. We offer a variety of after school programs, and ELLs are actively included in all programs. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. Bronx Envision Academy is an iLearn school, with access to Apex and PowerSpeak courses for newcomer ELLs. Apex courses focus on reading and writing, while PowerSpeak also includes support for speaking and listening. We also invest in Reading Plus to support ELLs with language acquisition. Reading Plus is integrated into the ENL pull out curriculum. We provide native language versions of texts in English class and audio books when available. 8  13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? We utilize glossaries, audiobooks, translated materials, and modified texts to provide home language support in ENL. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. Department teams meet twice monthly with a department facilitator to workshop upcoming projects, units and curriculum to ensure they are rigorous and grade-level appropriate and age-level appropriate for ELLs. The ENL teachers collaborate with the principal to ensure that the schedule provides co-planning opportunities for ENL teachers and content area teachers. Stand alone ENL is provided for 9th and 10th graders in one group and for 11th and 12th graders in another group. One of the ENL teachers is on the Professional Development committee and the Accreditation Committee, two groups that ensure that services and resources are appropriate for ELLs. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Bronx Envision Academy employs three ENL teachers and does not share instructional staff resources with other co-located schools. Our school shares a bilingual school psychologist with other schools on the campus to provide support for students who are dual classified ELL/SWD. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Our bilingual guidance counselor supports newly enrolled ELLs throughout the year and hosts workshops for families. We welcome new students for a Summer Bridge program and Family Orientation program. We provide a tour and mentor student for all new incoming students who join the school mid-year. Our parent coordinator is bilingual and provides outreach and support for Spanish-speaking families (representing the vast majority of ELLs at our school). Our ENL teachers, bilingual guidance counselor, and parent coordinator support with the enrollment process for families throughout the year. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? We offer Mandarin Chinese language elective and iLearn (online) advanced level Spanish. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? Our ENL teachers participate in English and History department professional development (weekly throughout the year). We collaborate with the BFSC to provide targeted PD throughout the year for assistant principals, paraprofessionals, guidance counselors, special education teachers, psychologists, speech therapists, and secretaries. Our ENL teachers attend trainings provided by the Bronx FSC to support ELLs' engagement with CCLS. English and History teachers participate in coaching via the Institute for Student Achievement focused on Common Core alignment and support for all students. At least one history teacher will participate in intervisitations focused on supporting ELLs and turnkey learning for colleagues. 9  2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. Our ninth grade team meets weekly with a grade team leader and the support of the bilingual guidance counselor. The team provides support in developing advisory curriculum to support all students, including ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school. We collaborate with the BFSC to provide professional development focused on ELL needs to meet the 50% total for ENL teachers. We utilize teacher leaders, including model teachers and peer collaborative teachers to support with on-site professional development (trainings, workshops, curriculum reviews, intervisitations, mentoring, lesson studies) for all teachers to meet the 15% as per CR Part 154.2. We maintain records of professional development on file in the principal's office. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We conduct parent meetings via 20 minute appointments with advisors. Our ENL teachers serve as advisors to around 50% of our ELL students and are scheduled to join conferences with the advisor of the remaining 50% of ELL students. We support with language interpretation and translation via TL translation funds for our bilingual staff. Meetings take place in fall and spring, adjacent to regular parent-teacher conferences to facilitate parent engagement. In partnership with the SLT and PA, our ENL teacher also leads a workshop for parents about the ENL program and language development process. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our bilingual guidance counselor provides Spanish language interpretation and has presented workshops for parents about New York graduation requirements. Parental involvement in Parent Association meetings is low among ELL and non-ELL families, however, participation at parent-teacher conferences and at community celebrations and performances is strong among ELL and non-ELL families. The parent coordinator maintains records of parent involvement, including agendas, sign-in sheets, and logs, and records interactions in the PCAR. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 0 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Emily Shu, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 1  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Bronx Envision Academy School DBN: 12X511 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Emily Shu Title Principal Angel Bookal Assistant Principal Luisa DeJesus Parent Coordinator Daniel Burke ENL/Bilingual Teacher Flavia Cruz Parent Shannon Threatt, History Teacher/Subject Area Eduvigen Mella, Spec Educ Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach Ariella Torres School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 12X511 School Name: Bronx Envision Academy Superintendent: Elaine Lindsey The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. At the beginning of each school year, emergency contact cards (blue cards) are distributed to parents during freshman orientation and through advisors for all grades. Advisors support school administrative staff with collection of the forms. Language preferences for parents are updated in ATS based on the emergency contact cards. For new students, we also utilize the Home Language Identification Survey to determine parents' and guardians' preferred languages. We monitor preferences and responses from parents from the Annual Learning Environment Survey to determine parents' preferred methods of communication. We maintain this information in ATS, and advisors and grade teams maintain parent contact logs that include information about translation and interpretation needs. We arrange for Parent-Teacher Conferences by appointment and utilize a spreadsheet to schedule interpreters to support parents. Our community associate and bilingual guidance counselor translate written documents for mailings, and we utilize an automated phone message system that offers translation to many languages. This system initiates phone calls in parents' preferred language (as indicated in ATS). 3  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language Albanian (1), Arabic (2), Bengali (3), French (1), Spanish (120), Wolof (2) 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. School calendar, report cards, attendance reports (ATS), progress reports (generated from Skedula), announcements for concerts and school events, Parent Association Meeting announcements, Parent Workshop events 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide New Student and Family Orientation (September), Senior College Process Orientation (September), Parent Teacher Conferences (October and interpretation service(s)? 4  March), Curriculum Night (September), Guidance Workshops (throughout the year), Financial Aid Night (November), New Student Orientation (August), Ongoing Counselor and Social Worker Outreach, Weekly Teacher Phone Outreach 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) We will post a welcome poster in the main office and have available the Bill of Rights and Guide to Language Access in the main office and all guidance offices. We will ensure the Language ID Guide is at the security desk and main office. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? We utilize results from the School Survey to gather feedback. We also hold focus groups with SLT parent members and volunteers for the Parent Association. 5 
