 11X532 School Name: BAYCHESTER MIDDLE SCHOOL Principal: SHAWN MANGAR   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: BEDS Code: Grades Served: School Address: Baychester Middle School 11x532 321100010532 6 th – 8 th School Number (DBN): 3750 Baychester Avenue, 3 rd Floor, Bronx, NY 10466 718-547-1890 Phone Number: Fax: Shawn Mangar SMANGAR@SCHOOLS.NYC.GOV School Contact Person: Shawn A. Mangar Email Address: Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Dominique Williams Fatima Grady Parents’ Association President: Debbie Auschand PhinettMorris SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: PhinettMorris N/A JaLeesa Beavers District Information Geographical District: 11 MeishaRoss-Porter Superintendent: 1250 Arnow Avenue, Bronx, NY 10469 Superintendent’s Office Address: MRoss@schools.nyc.gov Superintendent’s Email Address: 718-519-2620 Phone Number: Fax: Field Support Center (FSC)   FSC: Bronx Jose Ruiz Executive Director: 1 Fordham Plaza, Bronx, 10458 and 1230 Zerega Ave., Bronx, 10462 Executive Director’s Office Address: Executive Director’s Email Address: JRUIZ2@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: (718) 828-7776 Fax: (718) 828-6280   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Shawn Mangar Dominique Williams IeanaDomingue TBD GaryCohen CourtneyHiggins ChelseaThomas Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable Member/ UFT Member/ UFT Member/ UFT   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) AvrilHanely-Woods ShaniqueSutton IdelisJusto MonicaCohen Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ PTA Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. 1. What is your school’s mission statement? Mission Statement Section 4: CEP Overview We believe that our first responsibility is to our students and to their right to an education that prepares them to succeed in college. Credo   We believe that our first responsibility is to our students and to their right to an education that prepares them to succeed in college. Our students will receive daily personalized support and enrichment in a safe and rigorous learning environment. We acknowledge that our students are our equal partners and empower them to make choices that affect their path to college. Our second responsibility is to those who work with us and to their right to professional collaboration and leadership opportunities. Our staff will receive on-going support through a peer accountability system rooted in a reciprocal cycle of feedback. We acknowledge that our staff is invaluable to our success as an organization; we pledge to listen to their ideas and concerns. Our third and final responsibility is to the families of our students where we work and their right to partner with us to shape our policies. Our families will receive convenient and consistent communication about our plans and the opportunity to voice their thoughts. We acknowledge that our school model must align with the values and needs of the community's changing population. TRUST. TRY. TRAIN. THANK. 2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Principal Bio Shawn Mangar is an educational leader, who builds school culture that fosters trust and inspires the development of both students and staff. He is known for driving organizational excellence and conquering every obstacle with a novel approach. Starting his career as a special education teacher, Shawn followed his passion for developing others by becoming a top-rated NYC Teaching Fellow trainer. He is founder and principal of the award-winning Baychester Middle School in the Bronx, which develops not only distinguished scholars but also extraordinary teachers, 5 of whom have already become national educational leaders. Shawn and his school, Baychester Middle, have been featured on the Teaching Channel, in Quanta and Wired magazines, and in books, such as The Together Leader: Get Organized for Your Success - and Sanity! and Teach Like a Champion 2.0: 62 Techniques that Put Students on the Path to College. He has served on the Mayor’s Leadership Team on School Climate and Discipline and is a sought-after speaker for education programs on data-driven instruction and teacher training. Having been born, raised, and educated in the district where he works, Shawn explores new horizons in long training runs for his many marathons. Partnerships 1. Algebra for All 2. College Access for All 3. MMCC (Moshulu Montiefiore Community Center) [SONYC] 4. New York City Teaching Fellows 5. NYC Men Teach 6. Public Color 7. SCAN NY 8. SuitUp NYC 9. Teach for America 10. Teaching Matters 0  11. Uncommon Schools 12. Woodlawn Cemetery 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special Education: 22% English Language Learners: 4% 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Areas of Celebration 1. Rigorous Instruction  During the 2017 – 2018, our teachers were provided with the opportunity to have their unit plans reviewed by a coach or school leader for feedback prior to implementation. This peer feedback cycle resulted in over 70% of our team scoring an effective rating or higher in domain 1e.  Data-Driven Instruction & Planning committee meets quarterly to look at broader trends on the Mastery Connect platform, as well as overall teacher and scholar progress. The committee consists of the principal, assistant principal, ENL coordinator, Special Education coordinator, and a team of teacher leaders from each content area. The committee conducts classroom walkthroughs and combs through current and past unit plans to assess whether they are serving the needs all of their scholars. The committee also specifically monitors their Equity and Excellence goal. Then during Wave Academy (Professional Development), the committee turnkeys findings and content level teams have time to follow up and make improvements. 2. Supportive Environment  Baychester Middle School structures, such as the advisory program, enables each student to be known to an adult, provides for a safe environment, welcomes student voice, and supports a respectful relationship between staff and students. The school’s advisory program ensures that there is a primary contact for the family of each student. Advisors teach community standards, conflict resolution, organizational strategies and communication skills. Advisors meet with students in the morning and afternoon, in order to monitor attendance and homework completion, review student progress and weekly goals. Advisors support their advisees by assisting them with preparing for student led conferences, (SLC), during which students share their progress with their families and the next steps they need to take to be prepared for the next level. Thus, the advisory structure effectively supports addressing students’ learning and social emotional needs.  The Scholar Culture Team is comprised of the school leaders, deans, guidance counselor, parent coordinator and grade level team leaders conducts weekly walkthroughs to assess the quality of school culture. The Scholar Culture Team shares results of the walkthroughs with the staff. Teachers, during grade level team meetings, reflect on the results and plan next steps for individual classes and the grade as a whole. Next steps include adjustments to the advisory curriculum, planning incentives, and practicing teaching and management strategies. 3. Effective School Leadership  Baychester Middle School partners with MMCC, Public Color, College Access for All, Uncommon Schools, the Together Teacher, and Teaching Matters to support with school-wide goals and initiatives. Uncommon Schools provides teacher-leaders with professional learning opportunities that are then turn keyed to 1  teachers within departments and/or grade level bands. In addition, all teachers attend either a grade team or instructional team meeting five days a week. The meetings provide a space for weekly data meetings, instructional walks, peer feedback, and refining instructional planning. Furthermore, the Principal strategically programs teachers to support the needs of all learners. As a result, two-thirds of all courses are co- taught, which is 50% more than the required number of courses by NYC DOE. In addition, Baychester Middle School purposefully programs all scholars to partake in an advisory course that focuses on college preparation and career readiness as well  95% of all staff agree/strongly agree with the following UpBeat survey questions: -"My Principal communicates a clear vision for teaching and learning for the school" -"The evaluation feedback I have received has helped me improve the quality of my work." -"The administrator who evaluates me is able to accurately assess the quality of my work." Area of Focus Strong Family-Community Trust: For the 2018 – 2019 school year, Baychester Middle School seeks to enhance our family-community ties by furthering opportunities for staff and families to interact with one another. It is our goal that by the end of the 2018 – 2019 school year, 80% of families will have attended at least three parent engagement activities/events. 2  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 11X532 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 06,07,08 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 300 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 42 41 4 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 15 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 86.0% % Attendance Rate 79.0% % Reduced Lunch 4.0% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 2.7% 26.7% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 0.7% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 7.26 13% 33% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 32.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation N/A N/A N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A NO N/A NO NO Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A NO NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A NO High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No N/A 40 43 4 92.5% 7.0% 21.7% 68.0% 1.7% 3.0% 2 29% 6.5 11.9% 39% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A No No YES N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO NO N/A N/A N/A NO N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 3  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Strengths 1. Teachers develop rubrics and assessments that are aligned to the school’s curriculum. Staff members administer common assessments that are developed during their data cycles using io Assessment. Teachers use the results from assessments to adjust the tasks and curriculum. 2. Students are provided with actionable feedback and are aware of what they need to do to improve their work. Teachers use a standards mastery tracker to monitor student progress across grades and subject areas. The tracker includes the standards that were assessed, type of question, correct response, and the students’ response. The data is then used to adjust the curriculum and instruction, as well as create student groupings. 3. There is a Data Driven Instruction Committee (DDI) that establishes goals for teachers’ use of data and monitors progress towards meeting the goals. The team uses unit plan and lesson plan feedback, Advance ratings, and assessment results compiled on io Assessment to measure student progress towards goals. The DDI team meets to plan for full implementation of io Assessment as well as planning and implementing professional development to support teachers in utilizing the tools that io Assessment provides.  Priority need(s) Many of our scholars enter 6th grade behind grade level in ELA and Math. As educators, it is our goal to ensure that all scholars leave our school at or above grade level. To this end we have studied the work of Paul Bambrick-Santoyo, author of “Driven by Data” and “Leverage Leadership”. He argues that data driven instruction (DDI) is one of the highest levers to improve student achievement. Since our inception, DDI has been a key pillar of our success. For the 2018 – 2019 school year, we aim to build upon our data structures and improve upon our Proficient Quality Review rating in 2.2 by providing additional focus and targeted supports for subgroups of students, which include SWDs and ELLs. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. 4  By June 2019, 10% increase in overall scholar performance on each end of unit assessment. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Create a school-wide calendar that accounts for unit start/end dates, data days, instructional team meetings, and PD. Provide students and caregivers with end of unit assessment results in their native language. Department Team Coordinators (DTCs) Scholars and Caregivers Hold weekly data meetings so that staff can review results and action create plans. Teachers Conduct ongoing professional development for staff on Data Driven Instruction (DDI) with a focus on supports and scaffolds for subgroups (SWDs and ELLs). Teachers June 2018 - June 2019 Assistant Principal Quarterly (October 2018 –June 2019) Quarterly (October 2018 –June 2019) Quarterly (October 2018 –June 2019) DTCs and Parent Coordinator Assistant Principal & Teaching Matters DTCs, Assistant Principal & Teaching Matters 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight.  Parent Coordinator & DTCs will lead sessions at monthly PTA meetings  Parent Coordinator will lead sessions before caregiver monthly open house visits  Parent Coordinator & Principal will update school website to provide additional resources for families and scholars Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Principal Assistant Principal 6  Instructional Teams Teaching Matters Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Survey results from staff on the effectiveness of observation & feedback as well as DDI [Quarterly]   Assess quality of re-teaching action plans using DDI rubric [Semi-annually]  Assess student growth outcomes around focus standards [Semi-annually]  Teacher evaluation ratings in Danielson 3D [Ongoing] Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) Student Growth via io Assessment Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child?  Strengths 1. Consistent communication and clear expectations help families understand how to support their children’s progress and prepare them for their next steps in learning. Parents attend a parent orientation meeting prior to the start of the school year. The meeting is designed to establish clear expectations for students and their families. Parents are provided with the instructional focus for the year, uniform guidelines, arrival and dismissal procedures, expected parent responsibilities, and dates for future parent meetings. Parents are also provided with the dates and times for upcoming high school fairs. 2. School leaders and teachers conduct grade-level advisory nights for families. They share the school’s system of trust, try, train, and thanks and what it means. Families are made aware of the school’s mission and goals. There is an overview of the school’s advisory program and invitation to attend the student-led conferences. Advisors also provide families with their phone numbers and email addresses in case they need to contact them. 3. The school has a Scholar Culture Committee that is comprised of administration, deans, parent coordinator, guidance counselor, grade team leaders, and the United Federation of Teachers (UFT) chapter leader. The Scholar Culture Committee establishes goals for the school’s culture, provides support in helping teachers and students meet those expectations, and developed a structured way to monitor progress. There is a school culture rubric that used by the team to conduct three formal walkthroughs. Additionally, there are informal culture walkthroughs that are conducted two times per week. Teachers are provided with support to improve culture on an as needed basis. 4. The Montefiore School Health Program (MSHP) provides coordinated primary and preventative healthcare to all students. MSHP offers a range of healthcare services to meet the needs of students while they are in school. Teachers can refer students for mental health and/or medical health services. Additionally, the MSHP provides two social workers who are part of the eighth grade team. They attend grade level team meetings and support the team to develop strategies that will promote student success with meeting schoolwide expectations.  Priority need(s) Researchers have found that attendance rates have been shown to have a high correlation with an increase in graduation rates, student achievement, and college acceptance. Additionally we have looked at our incoming scholars attendance rates in 5th grade and found that focusing on increasing their attendance rates in 6 th grade has led to higher academic gains for those students. Part 2 – Annual Goal 8  Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, the attendance rate for the entire student body in grades 6, 7, and 8 at Baychester Middle School (11x532) will be 93% or higher as measured by Annual Attendance Report. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Develop and implement incentives throughout the year to promote attendance Scholars with 100% attendance Quarterly Sept 2018 - June 2019 Attendance Team & Scholar Culture Team Schedule meetings with parents regarding excessive absences Caregivers Monthly Sept 2018 - June 2019 Attendance Team & Scholar Culture Team Implement a breakfast program to encourage students to come to school early Scholars Daily Principal 9/1/18 - 6/28/19 Implement a morning athletic program to encourage students to come to school early Scholars Daily PE Teacher 9/1/18 - 6/28/19 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. Parent Coordinator will provide caregivers with a parent handbook at the start of the school year. The handbook will outline expectations related to attendance and the attendance policy. Attendance teacher will meet with the caregivers of scholars that are in danger of not meeting our attendance goal. Parent Coordinator & Dean will host attendance policy sessions for parents. Parent Coordinator & Dean will distribute perfect attendance awards at PTA meetings during the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 0  Advisory Attendance Teacher Attendance Team Meeting CHAMPS Fitness Dean(s) Grade Team Coordinator(s) iO Classroom Parent Coordinator Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind X Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Attendance data will be monitored weekly via ATS & iO Classroom to identify trends, patterns, and next steps. At the mid-point of the school year we will evaluate our progress and effectiveness of our action plan in meeting our desired outcomes. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. ATS Attendance Reports iLog Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Strengths 1. Distributed leadership structures are in place. Teacher teams consistently analyze assessment data and student work for students they share or on whom they are focused. 2. Teachers have built leadership capacity and have a voice in key decisions that affect student learning across the school, typically resulting in improved teacher practice. Teacher teams that meet on a regular basis analyze student performance data and work products.  Priority need(s) For 2018 - 2019 we anticipate 3-4 new teachers will be joining our team. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of teachers agree or strongly agree that they receive regular and aligned feedback about their teaching from their mentor. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Selection of mentor(s) and pairing of mentee(s)/mentor(s) All staff September 2018 - June 2019 Observation and Feedback Committee Training and support for mentors Mentors Quarterly Mentor and New Teacher Center Creation of observation and feedback committee, goals, and agendas for 2018 - 2019 September 2018 - June 2019 July 2018 Observation and Feedback Committee Observation and Feedback Committee Meet monthly with Observation and Feedback Committee to conduct an audit of next steps provided by mentor 1st year teachers September 2018 - June 2019 Observation and Feedback Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will present committee goals to parents at parent orientation. Principal will present Observation and Feedback Committee data at PTA & SLT meetings during the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. District 11 partnership with the New Teacher Center New Teacher Mentor 3  Observation and Feedback Committee Professional development for mentor and new teachers Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Progress monitoring will occur quarterly Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Reports Internal Team Survey Results (Upbeat) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Strengths 1. At the beginning of the year staff is provided with a staff playbook that includes clear instructional and cultural expectations, as well as deadlines for submission of all requested artifacts. Staff is required to sign to acknowledge receipt of the playbook. 2. The school leader uses a system of trust, try, train, and thanks to support the staff in meeting expectations. 3. The school has established an Adult Culture Committee that is responsible for upholding school values, ensuring staff satisfaction, and planning/organizing events for staff.  Priority need(s) Previous learning environment surveys indicate that teacher to teacher trust is an area for growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 85% of teachers agree or strongly agree that teachers in this school trust each other. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Establish committee members and goals for 2018 - 2019. Reflect on what worked/didn't work in 2017 - 2018. All staff Embed monthly committee meetings within school wide calendar. All staff Finalize committee action plan for 2018 - 2019. All staff Hold bi-monthly meetings to review data, trends, and identify next steps Committee Members School leaders School leaders School leaders September 2018 - June 2018 September 2018 - June 2018 September 2018 - June 2018 September 2018 - June 2018 Adult Culture Committee Members 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Principal will present committee goals to parents at parent orientation. Principal will present Adult Culture Committee data at PTA & SLT meetings during the school year. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Adult Culture Committee School Leadership Team UFT Consultation Committee Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. 6  X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Step back meetings with the Adult Culture Committee will occur quarterly during the 2018 - 2019 school year. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Quarterly Team Surveys Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year.  Strengths 1. Parents attend a parent orientation meeting prior to the start of the school year. The meeting is designed to establish clear expectations for students and their families. Parents are provided with the instructional focus for the year, uniform guidelines, arrival and dismissal procedures, expected parent responsibilities, and dates for future parent meetings. Parents are also provided with the dates and times for upcoming high school fairs. 2. Baychester Middle School provides scholars with Student-Led Conferences in lieu of traditional parent-teacher conferences. The result is higher parent turnout and more student ownership for academic outcomes. 3. Baychester Middle School provides space for grade teams to collaboratively carry out parent engagement for caregivers. The result has been increased decision making by teachers and a robust offering of events designed for caregivers.  Priority need(s) Based on data and trends, our SLT collaboratively decided that parent engagement is an area for growth. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 80% of families will have attended at least three parent engagement activities/events. 8  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? SLT will determine dates for parent engagement activities/events. Staff, Scholars and Caregivers September 2018 - June 2019 SLT Provide grade teams and Parent Coordinator with dates, criteria for success, and incentive for parent engagement activities/events. Staff, Scholars and Caregivers September 2018 - June 2019 Principal Grade Teams will plan and carry out two parent engagement activities/events. Staff, Scholars and Caregivers September 2018 - June 2019 Grade Team Coordinators SLT will plan and carry out two parent engagement activities/events. Staff, Scholars and Caregivers September 2018 - June 2019 SLT 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. N/A Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Funds to purchase any supplies necessary for activities/events Grade Team Coordinators Parent Coordinator School Leadership Team 9  Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Grade Team Coordinators and the School Leadership Team will keep track of the number of parent engagement activities/events as well as attendance via Google Docs on a quarterly basis. At the mid-point of the school year (February), we will allocate time during our School Leadership Team meeting to track progress towards this goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Google Docs Team Surveys (Quarterly) Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 0  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) F & P results Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) Independent reading time Mathematics Baseline assessment results Math Club Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group During school One to one tutoring Before/during/after school One to one (using online software) Small group During school After school program Khan Academy One to one (online software Science F & P results Re-teaching Small group During school During school Social Studies F & P Results Re-teaching Small group During School At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) Attendance records and teacher referrals At-risk counseling One to one During school Small group After school program 1  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 10 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. School supplies Uniforms Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 2  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 3  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. Baychester Middle School (11x532) is committed to hiring and retaining highly effective and qualified educators to student achievement. Baychester Middle School recruitment efforts include: (1) Attending university/college job fairs (2) Establishing partnerships with Teach for America and the New York City Teaching Fellows (3) Posting positions electronically on a variety of websites, social networking sites, and employment portals and (4) Attending job fairs hosted by the NYC DOE . Baychester Middle School (11x532) is also committed to retaining highly effective and qualified teachers. This goal is met through: (1) Recognizing teachers and celebrating excellence (2) Developing opportunities for teachers to grow as educators (3) Check in’s with teachers and (4) Providing teachers with on going feedback on their teaching practice and (5) The development of a teacher career ladder that allows for teacher-leader positions such as grade team leaders and department team leaders. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). (1) Weekly department team meetings are built into the schedule to allow teachers to reflect on student work and CCSS implementation (2) Staff will utilize professional development time to focus on checks for understanding (CFU) and aligning our assessments to meet the rigor of the CCSS. Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. 4  N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. (1)Teachers are selected by peers to be a part of a committee that make recommendations to the Principal. (2) Professional Development Mondays (Wave Academy), are set-aside as “Data Days” to analyze the results and create action plans 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Column B 5  Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Verify with an (X) Section Reference(s) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 207,721.00 0 0 0 2,119,130.00 X X Section 5 - Parts A-E Section 5 - Parts A-E 1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and 6  achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated:  Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 7  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Baychester Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. Baychester Middle School will support parents and families of Title I students by: Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students 1. Providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math, and use of technology; 2. Providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; 3. Fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; 4. Providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; 5. Sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; 6. Providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality 8  The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: 1. Actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; 2. Engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; 3. Ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; 4. Support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; 5. Maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; 6. Conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability, grade-level curriculum, and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; 7. Provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., ESSA/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, School Quality Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; 8. Host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the ESSA; 9. Schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; 10. Translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; 11. Conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: 1. Holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; 2. Hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; 3. Encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; 4. Supporting or hosting Family Day events; 9 5. Establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; 6. Encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; 7. Providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress 8. Developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; 9. Providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand. School-Parent Compact (SPC) Template School-Parent Compact (SPC) Baychester Middle School, in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards on assessments. Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with Common Core State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 1. Using academic learning time efficiently; 2. Respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; 3. 4. Offering high quality instruction in all content areas; 5. Providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required Implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESSA): I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: 1. Conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; 2. Convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; 3. Arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; 4. Respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; 5. Providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; Involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 6. 7. Providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; 0 8. Ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff 1. Ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 2. Notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; 3. Arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; 4. Planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; Provide general support to parents by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents 1. Creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; 2. Assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); 3. Sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering with all members of the school community; 4. Supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; 5. Ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; 6. Advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the Title I requirement for Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and Title I programs; 1. Monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; 2. Ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities and his/her age 3. Check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; 4. Read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); 5. Set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 6. Promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; 7. Encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; 8. Volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; 9. Participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; 10. Communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; 11. Respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; 1  12. Become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; 13. Anticipate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department to learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; 14. Take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; 15. Share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; III. Student Responsibilities Student Responsibilities: 1. Attend school regularly and arrive on time; 2. Complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; 3. Follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; 4. Show respect for myself, other people and property; 5. Try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; 6. Always try my best to learn. 2  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 11 School Name Baychester Middle School Borough Bronx School Number 532 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Shawn Mangar Coach ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Jacquieline Zenon Teacher/Subject Area Giselle Giraldi-Esteban, Sp. Teacher/Subject Area Iris Pagan, Sp. Ed/ELA Related-Service Provider Superintendent Assistant Principal Elizabeth Leebens Coach School Counselor Gina Salemi Parent Fatima Grady Parent Coordinator Natasha Robinson Field Support Center Staff Member Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 0 0 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 1 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 0 D. Student Demographics 3  Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 299 Total number of ELLs 13 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 4.35% Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 K 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? The assessment tool Baychester Middle School uses to assess early literacy skills is Fountas and Pinnell and the Wilson Reading system. The data shows that ELLs at our school fall on a continuum of reading levels. The ENL teacher will also create an assessment targeted specifically at measuring English language growth amongst ELLs that is aligned to the NYSESLAT assessments and upload this data onto Mastery Connect. This is especially important for tracking student progress at the lower levels (anything below Expanding), as vocabulary acquisition is essential before students can become fluent readers. Moreover, interims will be given throughout the year in order to track how students are progressing on Common Core State Standards in both Math and ELA. 2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? 4  The school uses Mastery Connect to track progress for all scholars in all Common Core Learning Standards. Scholars who are below grade level in reading will receive Wilson Just Words training in their pull out sessions with the ENL teacher. The platform allows teachers to assess scholar progress frequently and to group scholars strategically by need. Our ENL teacher has designed several formative assessment checks aligned to the NYSESLAT the CCLS to check scholar progress through Mastery Connect. Scholars classified as ENL are in a subgroup and teachers across all content areas track their progress. In addition, our ENL teacher administers the Fountas and Pinnell reading assessment three times a year to assess scholar reading growth. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We evaluate the success of our ENLs based on data from the NYESLAT scores, growth using F & P scores, interims, and growth on teacher-created assessments uploaded on Mastery Connect. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? ENL scholars are grouped strategically within the content area classrooms based on their data in Mastery Connect. They are provided with content materials in English and in their native language and small group interventions by their content area teacher and our ENL teacher. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] Our Data Driven Instruction and Planning Committee reviews schoolwide progress metrics from interims and formative assessments uploaded onto Mastery Connect and to plan interventions. The committee consists of principal, assistant principal, ENL coordinator, SPED coordinator, and teacher leaders from each content area. Growth for our ENL scholars is one of our main goals for the year. After reviewing the data, our ENL coordinator facilitates specific interventions for each of our 13 ENL scholars including small group interventions within class, pull out reading help using Wilson Just Words, family meetings, etc. 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Baychester Middle School will primarily use the NYSESLAT assessment to evaluate and inform our ELL programs. We will also use the NYS ELA and Math exams and formative CCLS aligned assessments uploaded into the Mastery Connect platform. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? Our Data Driven Instruction and Planning Committee shares findings based on Mastery Connect data quarterly. Also, our ENL coordinator works with the Assistant Principal to ensure programming and interventions are tailored to scholars throughout the year. Part IV: ELL Programming Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. ELL students of the same grade level are typically placed in the same class (with the exception of self-contained ELLs) for most of the school day. This makes it so it's easier for the ENL instructor to provide services for them. Sometimes, students, especially those at the "Entering/Emerging" level, receive sheltered instruction in a small group setting. 5  Other times, ENL and content area teachers work together in a co-teaching collaborative style situtation. The needs of every ELL child are taken into consideration before creating the ENL teacher's program, so that students get the maximum amount of support, and so that we meet the new requirement per Part 154. b. TBE program. If applicable. Not applicable c. DL program. If applicable. Not applicable 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? -Students at the "Entering" level receive 360 minutes (or two units of study) per week. One of these units is Stand-Alone ENL, and one is Integrated ENL/ELA. Scholars receiving stand-alone ENL will work in a small group with our ENL coordinator, Ms. Zenon, specifically on vocabulary acquisition, speaking and conversation practice, and Wilson Just Words. -Students at the "Emerging" level receive 360 minutes (or two units of study) per week. Services can be a combination of stand-alone ENL, integrated ENL/ELA, and or Content Area support. -Students at the "Transitioning" level receive 180 minutes of service a week. This includes a combination of ENL/ELA and Integrated ENL/Content Area support. -Students at the "Expanding" level receive 180 minutes of service a week. This includes one unit of ENL/ELA or other Content Area support. -Students at the "Commanding" level receive 90 minutes of service a week. This includes Integrated ENL/ELA or Content area or other approved services. Services will be updated monthly in STARS to reflect the minutes of stand-alone and integrated ELA minutes each scholar will receive. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. Teachers will employ differentiation, multiple checks for understanding, multiple methods of assessment, and native language resources--when available in order to ensure that ELLs are engaged in rigorous learning tasks. One thing that our school does almost across the board is to use packets with "guided notes." This makes it easier for ELLs to keep up with, and to take notes off of the mini-lesson. Moreover, our school, in both the ELA and the Humanities classes teaches a paragraph format called RAFFT where students are given a paragraph structure for responding to a prompt. This paragraph structure includes sentence starters and requires students to cite evidence from a text. The ENL teacher pushes into some ELA and Humanities classes in order to support the ELLs. This support could, for entering and emerging students, include giving the students a separate, developmentally appropriate assignment from the rest of the class, but which focuses on the same content that the other kids are working with. This could also simply be providing additional support and explanation to students when completing the same work as their mainstream counterparts. In addition to push-in services, there is one period of sheltered instruction that is offered to ELLs at the "emerging" or "entering" levels. In the sheltered instruction class, students work on skills stressed in the CCLS such as citing evidence from a text or figuring out the meaning of the vocabulary word in context. Materials in the sheltered instruction class include selections from the "All About the USA" series, texts from ReadWorks.org, VOA Special English, Colorin Colorado, the Ready to Write series, etc. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? We administer the Spanish Lab-R when we receive a new ELL that comes from a Spanish-speaking household. This gives us an idea of their incoming native language skills. We also ensure that all state exams are provided to scholars in their native language (when applicable) . 6  5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status -A. SIFE: Read out loud to the student when you can. Pair the student with another kid who speaks the same native language. Provide small group instruction when possible. Provide differentiated learning tasks when possible, so that the student may access the content at his/her level. Use technology (such as videos in the student's native language on Khan Academy) in order to help support student learning. Use reading intervention programs like Wilson or Achieve 3000 or Read 180 or whatever else is available. Time and a half is given for state tests. -B. Newcomer: Students who are "Entering" should receive Stand-Alone instruction in ENL in order to build up BICS (Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills) in order to build a base for transitioning to learning CALP. All Newcomers should be exposed to graphic organizers, phonics, basic grammatical concepts, videos to support learning, pictures, the creation of visuals to support unerstanding, theatrical techniques possibly, and on occasion shall be given different/modified tasks than the rest of the class. Students should start off working in homogenous language groups, and then should then transition into heterogenous language groups once they've built up BICS. Time and a half is given for state tests. -C. Developing: Students who are at this phase should, ideally, test at the "Transitioning" level or higher. If a student who falls into this category falls below this, then multiple intervention services should be considered. Questions should be asked about whether the student has any special needs or other extenuating circumstances that are preventing this student from progressing. Students who are at the "Transitioning"/"Expanding" /"Commanding" levels should be given, as much as possible, the same work as their native speaking counterparts. These kids often need little pushes like creating multiple drafts for mastery learning, participating in reading intervention programs, and extended time on in-class exams in order to get them where they need to be. Graphic organizers, outlines, and visual aids are also helpful to this group. Time and a half is given for state tests. -D. Long-Term ELLs: Students in this category often have serious literacy issues. Often times, those literacy issues are in both the first and second language. Long-Term ELLs may have been born in the United States and/or spent their entire schooling career in the United States. Sometimes, they've gone back and forth between the U.S. and their parents' home country. These kids often feel sensitive about the fact that they carry the "ESL" distinction, and this sensitivity should be respected by all instructors. These kids strongly benefit from reading intervention services. Like the "Developing" group, these students benefit from multiple drafts for mastery learning, graphic organizers, outlines, etc. Time and a half is given for state tests. -E. Former ELLs: Former ELLs get the support of an ENL instructor at least 2x a week in one of their content area classes. Former ELLs are largely given the same work as mainstream students. However, they may require additional explanation. They also benefit from techniques such as multiple drafts for mastery learning, graphic organizers, outlines, etc. Time and a half is given for state tests. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? Teachers of ELL-SWDs apply techniques such as "Whole Brain Treaching," graphic organizers, visual aids, gallery walks, Think-Pair-Shares, read alouds, etc. The ENL teacher sometimes co-teaches with the special education teachers in order to provide the ELLs with more teacher support. The ENL teacher currently works with two self-contained teachers during their ELA block. These teachers use a combination of materials. Some of the materials are at grade level, and others are at the students' levels. The teacher does this in order to scaffold learning. Teachers of ELL-SWDs also use hands-on resources such as manipulatives (for math), they have students create diaromas, etc. in order to access multiples points of entry for student engagement. We currently do not have any ELLs with mandated bilingual services on their IEP. If we did, we would look for appropriate placement for the student in another school within the district. If no placement is available, we have bilingual paras that can help support these students. 7  7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? Teachers of ELL-SWDs try to place students in the least restrictive environment possible. ELL-SWDs who are in self-contained, and who seem to do quite well in their classes, are sometimes moved to co-taught classes if parents/teachers feel that it will be in the best interest of the child when all parties meet to discuss the IEP. ELL-SWDs' progress is continually mesasured throughout the year to make sure that students are appropriately placed, so that they are able to work to their maximum potential. Our ENL coordinator collaborates with our Special Education teachers to write pertinent IEP goals for ENL scholars with disabilities and to update and reflect upon the progress of each scholar toward these goals. ENL scholars with disabilities sometimes receive additional stand alone services within the week targeted toward Wilson Just Words when reading goals are not being reached. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. In ELA, the targeted intervention program we use is called READ 180. It targets Transitioning-Expanding ELLs-SWDs. In addition, push-in and pull- out services are provided to support ELLS. We have also used Achieve 3000 and Rosetta Stone in order to help support ELLs in ELA/Humanities. The Math, Science, Humanities, and ELA classes use a teaching technique where students learn from the mini-lesson using a practice called "guided notes." This means that students are given cloze notes which help ELLs and other struggling learners keep up with the lesson. Moreover, in the Math, Science, Humanities, and ELA classes ELL students are often placed with a partner who speaks the same native language as them. We have copies of our Humanities textbook in both English and Spanish. Hand-on materials (manipulatives) are sometimes used in Math and Science. Graphic organizers are sometimes used in ALL content area classes. For ELL students, adapted/differentiated handouts may be handed out in any of the content areas. Khan Academy videos are another great intervention resource for struggling students in Math. Khan Academy videos are available in both Spanish and English. In co-taught classes, small groups are students are sometimes pulled out of class in order to receive intervention services. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? More professional development geared towards supporting ELLs in the Content Areas should be provided, either in or out of house. Teachers should meet to specifically discuss ELL progress on a regular basis (as a bullet point on grade team meetings). 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? Not applicable 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. All students are invited to participate in the SONYC after school program. At this program, students are allowed time to work on homework before they transition to clubs. The lowest performing sixth graders (about half of whom were ELLs last year) were part of a target group to receive small group homework help three days a week (Wednesday through Friday). The ENL teacher was the one to lead this program. This group will most likely continue to meet this year. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials are used to support ELLs. For students that have already mastered BICS, the ELA classes have independent reading books that are leveled according to the F & P system. The text that the ELA class reads as a group is appropriate for the grade level of the students. The ELA teachers also have access to a program that provides differentiated reading tasks that focus on the same content. For "entering"/"emerging" students, a variety of support texts are used such as Easy True Short Stories, the All About the USA series, Visions, Ready to Read/Ready to Write series, etc., etc. In the past, programs such as Read 180/Achieve 3000 have been used to support literacy development for ELLs of all levels. Khan Academy 8  videos, sometimes provided in the native language, have been used as a helpful tool in MATH classes. Rosetta Stone, has also been used, as a supplement in Humanities classes. The Humanities textbook, on American History, is available in both English and Spanish. Teachers also use Google translate and audio books in scholars' native languages to provide additional listening support for scholars in their native language. For example, in ELA class instead of reading To Kill A Mockingbird independently, ENL scholars are provided with headphones and the audio book so that they can hear the way words are pronounced as they read along. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? When native language resources are available, they are sometimes given to the student as an aid. However, teachers also are cognizant of the fact that students may present literacy gaps in their native language, so native language resources have to be used in combination with a variety of different differentation techniques. The ENL teacher collaborates with content area teachers in Humanities and ELA to provide specific bilingual glossaries aligned to the content teachers' current unit. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. The ENL teacher will work carefully with the Assistant Principal to ensure that Part 154 guidelines are met. Students should not be placed in a pull-out class with a student population spanning more than two grade levels. Support resources are carefully selected to make sure that they are both grade and age appropriate. There's a delicate balance between selecting materials that both respect each student's linguistic development, and which also push them towards building grade-level appropriate skills. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? Baychester Middle School participates in instructional focus groups with the other schools in our campus. Through this initiative, principals, assistant principals, and teachers conduct instructional walkthroughs and share curricular resources to learn from one another. In addition, schools across our campus share curricular resources and support strategies for scholars with disabilities and ENL scholars. 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). All ELLs are also invited to participate in after school clubs through the SONYC program and to participate in various summer camps in collaboration with Montefiore Medical Center that exists on our campus. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Students are currently offered Spanish in 7th grade. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? 9  Teachers receive training on the changes to Part 154, ELL demographics, what a SIFE is, and on how to use the services provided by the Department of Translation and Interpretation so that staff members can communicate with non-English speaking parents. Moreover, once a month, teachers are trained on a variety of differentiation techniques throughout the year which are designed in order to boost ELL achievement . In addition, the staff is working on techniques such as Everybody Writes and the Art of the Sentence to provide more scholars with more opportunities to express themselves in writing and more opportunities for supports. The Art of the Sentence PD in particular asks teachers to write targeted sentence starters and parameters that require scholars to use key vocabulary words. The ENL teacher engages in a variety of professional development workshops both in and out of school throughout the year. This may include trainings on things such as close reading or writing techniques, in order to move ELL students closer to the standards established in the CCSS. The ENL teacher makes it a point to learn about the changing regulatory environment by regularly attending DOE organized professional development series on things such as the changes to part 154. Our non-instructional staff including our parent coordinator, our enrollment secretary, and our director of operations attend training on inclusive practices for parents and families who speak languages other than English, administration of the Home Language Survey, and the offerings and choices families with ENL scholars have for enrollment in the City of New York. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. The ENL teacher will, once a month, deliver professional development to the entire staff. This professional development will include differentiation techniques that will help ELLs, how to communicate with non-English speaking parents, instructional resources available to assist ELLs, and possibly other struggling learners within a teacher's class. Records of this professional development are kept on the school's Google Drive. For each section of our professional development plan on Monday's, the facilitator requires teachers to spend time thinking about how the technique or learning of the day applies to scholars with disabilities and ENL scholars. All professional development activities are kept in a Shared Drive folder on the school's Google drive and include agendas, videos, practice sessions, and powerpoints for each training. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? Every Tuesday, from 3:10-3:50, teachers are given time in order to focus on "Parent Engagement." Our ENL teacher will use this time in order to reach out to parents, in order to update them on their child's progress in school and in order to help them feel welcome in the school community. When needed, the ENL teacher or any staff member, will use the over-the-phone translation services provided by the Department of Translation and Interpretation. In addition to this, behavioral reports (known as "score cards") are sent home to the parents on a weekly basis. Parents are asked to acknowledge their child's score card by signing that they received it. On top of this, progress reports with grade data are sent out on a regular basis. The progress reports are printed out from Skedula, and are printed in the parent's preferred language of communication according to ATS. One-to-one meetings are recorded in anecdotals section of Skedula and in iLog if applicable. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our school has a variety of events that parents are invited to throughout the year. Once a month, on Wednesdays, there is a PTA meeting which is organized by the Parent Coordinator. There are also the required Parent Teacher Conferences and optional award ceremonies. Specific examples include scholar led conferences twice a year. Scholars prepare a presentation in their native language for their families that explains their progress in school, their strengths and their areas for improvement. The scholar then gives their presentation to their ENL teacher, their advisory teacher, and their parent/caregiver. Additionally, all parents are invited to Parent Orientation in August. There is a parent orientation for each grade level and all materials and the presentation and materials are translated into Spanish for Spanish-speaking families. For 0  example, 7th grade orientation helps families understand the high school process. The Parent Coordinator largely serves as the organizer of any large event that involves the families. There are a fair amount of Spanish speaking parents, parents of ELLs and even more so of former ELLs. We have a few Spanish speaking paraprofessionals that circulate at these events, and help translate to parents so that they feel included. We also have a French speaking teacher who is able to communicate with a couple of the ELL parents. All record of one-on-one parent interactions are kept in Skedula. Sign in sheets for orientation and scholar led conferences are held by the Parent Coordinator. All orientation materials and powerpoints are uploaded onto the school's Shared Drive. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. Paste response here: 1 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Shawn Mangar, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 2  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Baychester Middle School School DBN: 11x532 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Shawn Mangar Title Principal Elizabeth Leebens Assistant Principal Natasha Robinson Parent Coordinator Jacqueline Zenon ENL/Bilingual Teacher Fatima Grady Parent Giselle Giraldi-Esteban Math/S Teacher/Subject Area Iris Pagan ELA/SpED Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 2/7/18 2/7/18 2/7/18 2/7/18 2/7/18 2/7/18 2/7/18 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 3  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 11X532 School Name: Baychester Superintendent: M. Porter The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No (*Primary) * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. The Home Language Identification Survey is used to initially determine what language the parent would like to receive information in. Over time, parents may change the preferred language of communication with the school. This would be noted on the blue emergency contact sheet. If a parent indicates a different language on the Emergency Card than the HLIS, then the information should be updated on ATS using the UPPG screen. 2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. 4 Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Language There are 30 parents who have indicated that Spanish is their preferred language of communication from the school. 2 have indicated French. We have a new student from Cambodia whose parents we will be meeting with next week in order to determine language preferences. The rest of the parents have indicated that English is their preferred language of communication from the school. 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to How do you plan to translate? Families Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Parent Teacher Conference information is usually distributed the week before conferences, if not more in advance. Information is thus provided on PTCs in early November, early March, and then mid-April. PTA meetings happen on a monthly basis, and communication is distributed about a week beforehand. After-school program information is distributed at Parent Teacher Conferences. 5  2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide interpretation service(s)? 9/16 Parent Engagement Night 11/17 Parent Teacher Conferences 11/18 Parent Teacher Conferences 3/16 Parent Teacher Conferences 3/17 Parent Teacher Conferences 5/11 Parent Teacher Conferences We typically have various awards ceremonies throughout the year, PTA meetings, 8 th grade graduation, and other events that parents are invited to. On Tuesdays, teachers participate in parental outreach from 3:10 to 3:50 p.m. Guidance counselors also reach out to homes, on an as-needed basis. Our guidance counselor especially reaches out to the parents of 8 th graders, in order to inform them about the steps involved in the high school application process. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. 6  Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) The "Welcome Poster" is displayed in the hallway by our main office. Parents' Bill of Rights and Parents' Guide to Language Access will be distributed at Parent Teacher Conferences. The ENL teacher will insure that the security guard has a Language ID Guide at the front desk. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? Based on the 2014-2015 parent survey, there are various questions about how welcome the parents feel in the school and how frequently they communicate with their child's teachers. However, we are unable to gauge the feeling of the LEP parents specifically. Moving forward, we will create a survey for the parents to distribute on Parent Teacher Conference Night in order to gauge how LEP parents feel about the quality and availability of services at our school. 7 
