 08X558 School Name: WESTCHESTER SQUARE ACADEMY Principal: YIRA SALCEDO   Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Outline Section 1: School Information Page Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) Section 4: CEP Overview Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans  Section 5A Framework for Great Schools Element - Rigorous Instruction  Section 5B Framework for Great Schools Element - Supportive Environment  Section 5C Framework for Great Schools Element - Collaborative Teachers  Section 5D Framework for Great Schools Element - Effective School Leadership  Section 5E Framework for Great Schools Element - Strong Family-Community Ties Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Section 8: Title I Program Information Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC)   Section 1: School Information Page School Information School Name: Westchester Square Academy School Number (DBN): 08X558 BEDS Code: 320800011558 Grades Served: 9-12 School Address: 3000 E. Tremont Ave. Bronx, NY 10461 Phone Number: 718-904-5050 Fax: 718-904-5055 School Contact Person: Yira Salcedo Email Address: ysalcedo@schools.nyc.gov Principal: UFT Chapter Leader: Parents’ Association President: SLT Chairperson: Title I Parent Representative (or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson): Student Representative(s): CBO Representative: Yira Salcedo Frenchy Haynes Rhonda Higgins Yira Salcedo Nadine Martin Vanessa Danso Teniya Martin NA District Information Geographical District: 08 Superintendent: 1 FordhamPlaza CarronStaple Superintendent’s Office Address: Superintendent’s Email Address: cstaple@schools.nyc.gov Phone Number: 718-741-5834 Fax: 718-741-7098 FSC: Bronx Field Support Center (FSC) Jose Ruiz Executive Director: One FordhamPlaza Executive Director’s Office Address:   jruiz2@schools.nyc.gov Executive Director’s Email Address: 718-828-7776 Phone Number: ??? Fax:   Section 2: School Leadership Team (SLT) Signature Page All SLT members are expected to sign this page to confirm their participation in the development of this Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) and that they have been consulted with regarding the alignment of funding to support this school’s educational program, which includes annual goals and action plans, Academic Intervention Services (AIS), Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC). The SLT must include an equal number of parents and staff and have a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 17 members, in accordance with Chancellor’s Regulation A-655, available on the New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) website. Directions: 1. List the names of each SLT member in the first column on the chart below. 2. Specify the constituent group represented, e.g., parent, staff, student, Community Based Organization (CBO), and any position held by the team member. Core mandatory SLT members are indicated by an asterisk*. 3. SLT members should review this document and sign in the right-hand column in blue ink. If an SLT member does not wish to sign this plan, the member may attach a written explanation in lieu of his/her signature, which must be maintained on file at the school with the original SLT signature page. Note: Signature of SLT member indicates participation in the development of the CEP, not approval. 4. The original signed copy, along with any written communications pertaining to this page, is to remain on file in the principal’s office and be made available upon written request. Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Yira Salcedo Frenchy Haynes Rhonda Higgins Cristina Cortese Nadine Martin Teniya Martin Vanessa Danso Nadine Martin Tammy Larrier Simone Hartley *Principal or Designee *UFT Chapter Leader or Designee *PA/PTA President or Designated Co-President DC 37 Representative (staff), if applicable Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) Student Representative (optional for elementary and middle schools; a minimum of two members required for high schools) CBO Representative, if applicable/ Member/Parent CSA Member Member/ Member/   Name Position and Constituent Group Represented Signature (Blue Ink) Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/ Member/   Section 3: Directions and Guidance for Developing the Comprehensive Educational Plan The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) is meant as a tool to facilitate continuous improvement planning – to support schools in engaging their staff, parents, families, students, and community partners in assessing and prioritizing school needs, setting measurable improvement goals, selecting appropriate strategies to improve student outcomes, monitoring progress toward meeting annual goals, and communicating these efforts to the broader school community. This section will provide School Leadership Teams (SLTs) with guidance regarding CEP development aligned with the school’s state accountability and New York City’s Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools, Strong Schools, Strong Communities, and Framework for Great Schools. Equity and Excellence for All: Diversity in New York City Public Schools The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to supporting learning environments that reflect the diversity of New York City. NYCDOE believes all students benefit from diverse and inclusive schools and classrooms where all students, families and school staff are supported and welcomed. This work is essential to our vision of Equity and Excellence for all NYC students. The research is clear – that all students benefit from diverse, inclusive schools and classrooms. The Equity and Excellence for All initiative is already improving the quality of our schools, making them more attractive to a broader range of students. Through comprehensive educational planning informed by Equity and Excellence for All, schools will continue to work to fulfill the promise of diversity in New York City Public Schools for our families and students. Strong Schools, Strong Communities The New York City Department of Education (NYCDOE) is committed to working collaboratively with parents, families, educators, and communities to improve student achievement and ensure that every child graduates from high school prepared for college, a career, and a future as a productive, critically-thinking adult. The Department is establishing programs to strengthen ties between schools and communities, and is giving teachers and students the support they need to reach higher standards. These programs and supports are building a system of schools centered on student learning. Along with strengthened partnerships between parents, teachers, students, school leaders, and communities, these initiatives will ensure Strong Schools, Strong Communities, so that all students succeed. Additional information is available in a report, entitled Strong Schools, Strong Communities: A New Approach to Supporting New York City’s Public Schools and All of Our Students. The Framework for Great Schools and CEP Development The Framework for Great Schools encourages parents, educators, school communities, and external stakeholders to work together to improve student achievement and increase learning opportunities. This collaborative focus will ensure that every child is consistently ready for the next grade, level, and set of challenges. The Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP) will reflect this focus and should serve as the blueprint that engages a school community in a systematic, ongoing review and analysis of student needs to identify and address root causes and implement activities and strategies that improve outcomes for students. Based on robust research, the six elements of the Framework identify the areas that we must improve to accomplish high student achievement. By focusing attention and resources on what it takes for schools to function well, the Framework for Great Schools identifies the underlying strengths and weaknesses of a school and shows community members concrete ways to improve. In accordance with the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655, all SLTs are to develop an educational plan in consultation with parents, school staff, and students, to provide a meaningful opportunity for stakeholders to participate in shared decision making and school improvement. The expectation is that SLTs will engage in a comprehensive educational planning process to inform the development of five goals and action plans that align with   the first five elements of the Framework for Great Schools (listed below). The sixth element, Trust, is foundational to all the other elements. A goal that reflects a holistic approach will often address more than one element, as the elements work together to support student achievement. Place your goal in the section of the template where it fits best, knowing that it likely addresses other elements as well. The Six Elements of the Framework for Great Schools Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Strong Family-Community Ties: School leadership brings resources from the community into the school building by welcoming, encouraging, and developing partnerships with families, businesses, and community-based organizations. Trust: Everyone works toward the shared goal of improving student outcomes, preparing students for success in school and beyond. Across the school community, there is respect. School staff, parents, students and administrators value each other. The Quality Review and the Framework for Great Schools In order to address the six elements of the Framework for Great Schools, school communities should engage in improvement planning that is also informed by the NYCDOE’s Quality Review Indicators and other quantitative and qualitative data. NYCDOE’s Quality Review (QR) The Office of School Quality (OSQ) supports school improvement across the NYC Department of Education (DOE) by coordinating qualitative assessments of school communities. All of the qualitative assessments are rooted in the Quality Review rubric and drive improvements to school practice, with the ultimate goal of impacting student achievement. The Quality Review (QR) Rubric has ten indicators within three categories as outlined below: I. Instructional Core Across Classrooms: Curriculum (1.1), Pedagogy (1.2), Assessment (2.2) II. School Culture: Positive Learning Environment (1.4), High Expectations (3.4) III. Systems for Improvement: Leveraging Resources (1.3), Goals and Action Plans (3.1), Teacher Support and Supervision (4.1), Teacher Teams and Leadership Development (4.2), Monitoring and Revising Systems (5.1) School Quality Guide The School Quality Guide is an important part of the New York City Department of Education’s (NYC DOE’s) efforts to set expectations for schools and promote school improvement. The report is designed to assist educators to accelerate academic achievement toward the goal of career and college readiness for all students. The report is also available to families and other members of the community who wish to obtain detailed information about a school’s practices and performance. The School Quality Guide includes a mixture of qualitative and quantitative information. For the quantitative information, the report provides multiple years of data, which shed light on trends over time. The report also provides context for the school’s quantitative data by including comparisons to the performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. The report includes school-specific targets for each quantitative metric, set based on the historical performance of similar schools and all schools citywide. Title I Requirements and Strengthening Title I Parent Involvement   Title I schools are subject to the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) requirements regarding school accountability, professional development, and parent and family engagement. To strengthen parent leadership in Title I schools, and increase the involvement of all parents of Title I eligible children in improving students’ academic outcomes, all Title I schools are required to establish a Title I Parent Committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school to provide voice into the administration and spending of Title I funds. Title I parents may choose to establish:   It is recommended that the Title I Chairperson (or alternate representative) attends all regular meetings of the School Leadership Team (SLT). The SLT is responsible for facilitating consultation with the Title I parent committee regarding the joint development of the CEP, Parent and Family Engagement Policy, School Parent Compact (SPC) and the use of the 1% parent involvement set-aside in Title I schools. Title I parent must be consulted regarding the use of the Title I 1% budget. The Title I 1% set-aside is used to supplement parent and family activities as described in the school’s Parent and Family Policy and must be aligned with student achievement goals as outlined in the CEP. For additional guidance on establishing a Title I Parent Committee click here. a Title I parent subcommittee of the existing Parent Association (PA)/Parent-Teacher Association (PTA) or; a Title I Parent Advisory Council (PAC) Next Steps for CEP Development School Leadership Teams should engage in the following steps:  Step 1: Ensure that a fully formed and functional School Leadership Team (SLT) exists and meets all the requirements of Chancellor’s Regulations A-655.  Step 2: Conduct a comprehensive needs assessment informed by the school’s updated NYSED accountability status and most current quantitative and qualitative data. Prioritize areas of focus for this school year.  Step 3: Revisit your school’s current goals, modify existing goals, and/or strategically create new goals informed by the needs assessment and aligned with the Framework for Great Schools. Ensure the annual goals are SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. Writing your goals as SMART will help you monitor progress against the qualitative or quantitative measures you’ve identified, and will help your school community know when you’ve reached your goal.  Step 4: Build consensus around strategies, activities, and programs to address students’ needs in each action plan. Create action plans that translate into observable, effective strategies to improve student achievement.  Step 5: Update your school’s AIS section and complete the Students in Temporary Housing section. Title I schools must also update the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC).  Step 6: Establish a process for engaging in progress monitoring throughout the school year as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning to assess whether activities and strategies outlined in the action plans are resulting in improved student performance. Adjust practices, when necessary. Treat the plan as a living document. Adjust the plan along the way as your experiences and the evidence justify. Careful implementation of your ideas, follow-through, and continuous evidence-based monitoring of progress are the keys to accomplishing desired results. Section 4: CEP Overview 1. What is your school’s mission statement? At WSA, our mission is to develop confident readers, writers and speakers who feel deeply connected to and supported by our school community. We prepare our students for college through a liberal arts curriculum focused on writing, critical thinking and peer discussion, and we give them the opportunity to connect with their passions through elective coursework in the arts, sciences and humanities. An underpinning of the WSA model is a nurturing school culture that encourages reflection, collaboration and experiential learning.   2. Provide contextual information about your school’s community and its unique/important characteristics, including a description of strategic collaborations/partnerships and/or special initiatives being implemented. Unique important/characteristics  WSA is located on the 3rd and 4th floors of the Herbert H. Lehman Campus in the North Bronx, and is one of six schools in the building.  All WSA core curricula incorporates key literacy practices like the annotation of text, collaborative discussions, Socratic Seminar/Exposition, and writing. Teachers have developed common rubrics and use them as teaching and feedback tools across all classrooms.  We have high levels of co-teaching support in many classes to ensure that students are appropriately serviced. In all co-teaching arrangements, we have an expectation that both teachers are familiar with the content, actively involved in planning, and familiar with strategies for teaching all students. Strategic collaborations/partnerships  We will be participants in the Learning Partners program again this year collaborating with all schools on the campus.  AP for All: Several teachers are taking advantage of the training and support available through AP for All, and we are collaborating with the five other campus schools to offer more options/programming flexibility for students on the campus.  East Side House: A counselor from the East Side House CBO is housed in our school several days a week and meets new at-risk lower grade students, as well as older students who are demonstrating issues with engagement or attendance. Lehman College “College Now” program: a core of students travel off-site to take college-level courses not offered at our school.   Peer Group Connection: We have partnered with PGC to train our 11th and 12th grade students to serve as peer mentors for our incoming freshmen.  Blue Engine: We have partnered with Blue Engine to support ELA and Math instruction in the 9th grade.  SUNY Albany: The university partners with us to offer a college-level class for Bilingual students. We are also working to offer an English course through the university. 3. Describe any special student populations and what their specific needs are. Special student populations and needs  A fairly high number of students who have IEPs (28%) o Needs: differentiation strategies; explicit models and exemplars, personalized feedback with next steps; strategic pull-out groups; extended time and other testing accommodations, CDOS instruction; paraprofessional support.  An ELL population (around 7%) o ENL instruction with explicit language development strategies; differentiation strategies; explicit models and exemplars, personalized feedback with next steps; strategic pull-out groups; extended time and other testing accommodations. 4. Identify the elements of the Framework for Great Schools in which your school made the most progress over the past year, and your key areas of focus for this school year. Elements of Framework that we made most progress on  Rigorous instruction o Teachers participated in weekly professional development sessions aligned to the Danielson framework to support the development of effective pedagogical strategies across content areas resulting in effective and consistent daily lesson plans.  Collaborative teachers 0  o Teachers worked in department teams for the second half of the year to begin the process of vertical skill alignment for courses 9-12, including revision of curricula and unit maps.  Effective School Leadership o A small group of teachers participated in an after-school inquiry team to develop strategies and share best practices through examination of student work, data, and inter-visitations. Focal areas for the school this year/in need of improvement  Strong family-community ties o Build a more robust PA; build the capacity of the PA to increase community among parents by organizing several new parent-focused annual traditions: holiday dinner, out-of-state college trips, etc. Increase parental outreach by teachers- increase the frequency of communication with parents about academic and social issues; act earlier to alert parents of potential course failures. o  Collaborative teachers o Increase the amount of cross-disciplinary examination of student work to encourage coherence of literacy practices across the school. o Collaboratively agree on high-impact differentiation strategies to implement as a department, and consistently implement these in individual classrooms.  Effective School Leadership o Increase teacher input in the planning of the yearly PD calendar through weekly meetings with grade-team leaders and content leads. o Establishing more opportunities for distributive leadership by establishing a team structures, including grade teams and content teams. 1  School Demographics and Accountability Snapshot for 08X558 School Configuration (2018-19) Grade Configuration 09,10,11,12 Total Enrollment (2017-18) English Language Learner Programs (2018-19) 609 SIG Recipient (Y/N) Transitional Bilingual N/A Dual Language N/A Self-Contained English as a Second Language Special Education Programs/Number of Students (2015-16) # Special Classes (ELA) # Special Classes (Math) # Visual Arts # Foreign Language % Title I Population % Free Lunch % Limited English Proficient 8 8 10 9 % American Indian or Alaska Native % Hispanic or Latino % White # SETSS (ELA) # SETSS (Math) Types and Number of Special Classes (2018-19) # Music # Drama # CTE # Dance 23 25 3 # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (ELA) # Integrated Collaborative Teaching (Math) School Composition (2017-18) 81.0% % Attendance Rate 74.5% % Reduced Lunch 8.2% % Students with Disabilities Racial/Ethnic Origin (2017-18) % Black or African American 0.7% 58.8% % Asian or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander 11.2% % Multi-Racial Personnel (2015-16) Years Principal Assigned to School (2018-19) % of Teachers with No Valid Teaching Certificate % Teaching with Fewer Than 3 Years of Experience 2.2 7% 37% # of Assistant Principals (2016-17) % Teaching Out of Certification Average Teacher Absences (2014-15) Student Performance for Elementary and Middle Schools (2017-18) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (4th Grade) (2016-17) N/A N/A Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 Science Performance at levels 3 & 4 (8th Grade) (2016-17) Student Performance for High Schools (2016-17) ELA Performance at levels 3 & 4 Global History Performance at levels 3 & 4 4 Year Graduation Rate Regents Diploma w/ Advanced Designation 79% 70% 71.3% 3.3% Mathematics Performance at levels 3 & 4 US History Performance at Levels 3 & 4 6 Year Graduation Rate (2011 Cohort) % ELA/Math Aspirational Performance Measures (2015-16) Reward In Good Standing Focus District Priority School Overall NYSED Accountability Status (2018-19) No Yes Yes Recognition Local Assistance Plan Focus School Identified by a Focus District No Focus Subgroups N/A Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) (YSH = Yes Safe Harbor) Elementary/Middle School Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged American Indian or Alaska Native Hispanic or Latino White Students with Disabilities Economically Disadvantaged N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Science (2016-17) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A High School Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in ELA (2016-17) N/A NO N/A N/A YSH Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Mathematics (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A NO N/A N/A NO Met Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in Graduation (2016-17) Black or African American Asian or Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander Multi-Racial Limited English Proficient ALL STUDENTS N/A YES N/A N/A YES No N/A 90 94 3 83.6% 6.2% 22.7% 23.0% 4.9% 2.1% 4 44% 5 N/A N/A 77% 76% N/A N/A No No N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YSH N/A N/A N/A NO YES N/A N/A N/A YES 2  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5A – Framework for Great Schools Element – Rigorous Instruction: Instruction is customized, inclusive, motivating, and aligned to the Common Core. High standards are set in every classroom. Students are actively engaged in ambitious intellectual activity and developing critical thinking skills. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. This past year professional development and feedback from the observation process focused on supporting teachers in engaging in effective lesson planning to ensure daily lessons aligned with well-developed curriculum and unit maps. While curriculum maps are mostly aligned to the CCLS, teachers’ observations continue to demonstrate needed supports in planning cognitively engaging lessons aligned to Regents/AP assessments. Current scholarship data from the final marking period indicates that only 69% of students were successful in passing all of their classes for the year. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Rigorous Instruction. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 08X558 will provide coherent lessons that allow students to develop and apply disciplinary literacy skills which will result in an 8% increase from 77% to 85% in the percentage of 9th grade students earning 10+ credits to be on track for graduation measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 3  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in formative observations to assess teacher lesson planning practices, including survey of lesson plans from teachers across disciplines and grade levels (Weekly). All Teachers September -October 2018 Implement grade-level teams that will focus on aligning best practices across the grade to ensure implementation of similar routines and strategies to support student success (Daily). All Teachers September 2018 Engage in cycles of inquiry with grade-level teams to identify skill gaps and refine pedagogy, curriculum, and assessments to ensure that students are making progress towards skill mastery and credit accumulation (Weekly). All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Engage in vertical planning within content teams to ensure skill development 9-12; refine units and assessments to ensure alignment to the CCLS and Regents/AP exams (bi-monthly). All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Observation and observations reports with feedback and next steps aligned to Danielson 1a/1e (Weekly). All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Team Leaders, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Team Leaders, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Content Team Leaders, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Rigorous Instruction and New York State standards in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. We will ensure that families understand the course requirements, including examinations, through our various parent engagement activities throughout the year. Our first Curriculum Night will provide teachers with an opportunity to make course requirements explicit, including sharing examples of various tasks students will be asked to complete, typical lessons and course overviews, etc. Additional workshops will be provided to supplement the mandated conferences and support families understanding course requirements and expectations. In addition, through consistent communication during weekly Parent Engagement time, teachers will communicate student progress and strengthen the home/school connection. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. 4  Effective use of preparation periods by teachers, implementation of Common Planning Time, Monday Professional Development time in content teams, model teachers classrooms/campus-wide PLCs, professional texts/literature. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. Title III, X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Immigrant Title II, Part A Title III, Part A C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. By January, 2019, a review of scholarship data will indicate that at least 5% of students are on track to earn 10 or more credits. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. (e.g. Performance Series, January Regents, etc.) January (Term 1) Scholarship Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 5  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5B – Framework for Great Schools Element – Supportive Environment: The school establishes a classroom and school culture where students feel safe, supported, and challenged by their teachers and peers. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 3. What policies, practices, and structures are in place to ensure you are supporting the whole child? In 2017-18, the school continued to promote restorative justice practices across classrooms to decrease formal classroom removals and promote teacher ownership of classroom management and student behavior. This led to a decrease in the number of formal teacher removals as well as improving classroom culture and school tone while promoting consistency of instruction. This year we implemented an after-school Restorative Justice detention program to support student reflection and behavioral changes. In addition, 5 staff members participated in the Restorative Justice training provided by the campus Restorative Justice Coordinator from the Morningside Center. Furthermore, at the student-level, students understood the ladder of referral as teachers used the ladder to convey expectations and ensure adherence to student behavior expectations. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Supportive Environment. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 08X558 will provide all 9th grade students with a peer leader mentor which will result in a 5% increase from 68% to 73% in the percentage of students who will agree or strongly agree that they feel safe in the hallways, bathrooms, locker room, and cafeteria, measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 6  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Professional Development through Morningside Center for teachers on classroom management, communication, youth culture and culture sensitivity, and Restorative Justice interventions including: Various teachers across disciplines; September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal and members of the Dean Team Reintegration, Peer mediation, Behavior Logs, Guidance intervention meetings, At-risk counselling provided by Eastside House, Administration will provide feedback on classroom observations, Collaborate with Montefiore and Eastside House on creation of targeted groups Create a distributive leadership model using grade-teams to ensure teachers use common strategies to support student learning Use Skedula as a way to track and identify student progress and needs. Students and Parents Various teachers across disciplines All teachers Provide social-emotional skill-based lessons to students through a Guidance push-in model. Students, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level teams, Teachers Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Level teams, Teachers Guidance Counselors September 2018-June 2019 September 2017-June 2018 September 2018-June 2019 Implement Peer Group Connection program to train 11th & 12th grade students to mentor and support incoming 9th grade students. 9th graders; 11th & 12th graders September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, PGC Trained Teacher/Counselor Teachers will use Tuesday’s family engagement time to conduct outreach and arrange parent intervention meetings. Various teachers across disciplines; September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principals, Principal and members of the Dean Team Students and Parents 7  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Supportive Environment in order to support the whole child? Include the timeline and identify key personnel and stakeholders responsible for implementation and oversight. We will provide on-going communication between school and home through various stakeholders (parent coordinator, teachers, deans, school leaders). We will leverage the Family Engagement time on Tuesdays to allow teachers time and space to support communication between school and home. In addition, at least one parent workshop will focus on Restorative Justice practices to build families’ capacity in developing the skills to support students through these practices, creating coherence in the practices utilized at both school and home in order to promote positive behaviors and ensure student achievement. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. We will provide funding to support teachers who would like to attend Restorative Justice PD. The campus has purchased the service of Morningside to provide restorative justice training to parents, staff, and community members. We will also provide after-school restorative detention and mediation to effectively support students in resolving conflicts. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A PTA Funded Title III, Part A In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will continuously monitor the OORS data using the OORS management tool in the OSYD portal. We will do this on a monthly basis and will meet with the Dean Team and RJC team to discuss the progress of Restorative Justice practices. Teachers will continue to log parental outreach and interventions through the use of Skedula. The Dean Team will log all meditations and restorative justice circles using OORS and Skedula/Pupilpath. School support staff will iLog parent meetings and counselors will continue to update iLog with intervention. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. OORs Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 8  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5C – Framework for Great Schools Element – Collaborative Teachers: Teachers are committed to the success and improvement of their classrooms and schools. They have the opportunity to participate in professional development within a culture of respect and continuous improvement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. In previous years, teachers at WSA collaborated in department teams to share and resolve problems of practice. We have assessed that there were few opportunities for teachers to collaborate across disciplines in inquiry work as well as facilitate vertical planning within departments. Data from both credit accumulation and Regents passing indicate that there are gaps in teacher practice and student learning. Observations have also demonstrated that there are gaps in routines, expectations, and rigor across classes on the same grade level. We know that it is important for teachers to engage in structured professional development to examine student work, teacher work, and qualitative data to ensure that teacher practice is consistently refined based on these analyses, ensuring that curricula is aligned to the CCLS and Regents/AP exams. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Collaborative Teachers. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 08X558 will implement grade level and/or content team structures for teachers to analyze Regents data in order to implement targeted instructional strategies, which will result in a 10% increase from 45%to 55% in the percentage of teachers that agree or strongly agree that they have opportunities to work productively with colleagues in their school, measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 9  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Form interdisciplinary grade teams that will meet daily during teachers’ Circular 6 Professional Periods facilitated by a grade-team leader. Provide initial professional development for teams to begin inquiry work through professional readings, use of protocols, and examination of Scholarship & Regents data (Daily). Engage in cycles of inquiry work by selecting a shared focal group of students and a focus for the inquiry work. Use professional readings, protocols, inter-visitations, analysis of student work, analysis of teacher-created tasks, and examination of various data points to develop effective instructional strategies (Weekly). Form content teams that will meet weekly during the Monday professional development time facilitated by a content-team lead. Provide initial support for teams to being the vertical planning process through professional readings, use of protocols, and examination of Regents data. Engage in weekly, content-based professional development to refine curricula and assessments to ensure alignment to the CCLS, Regents/AP exams, and a clear vertical progression of skills. Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Teachers assigned to Common Planning Grade Team work; Teachers by grade across disciplines Teachers assigned to Common Planning Grade Team work; Teachers by grade across disciplines All teachers, by departments September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Teams, Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Teams, Teachers September 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Teams, Teachers All teachers, by departments September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Teacher Teams Conduct weekly parental outreach during Tuesday afternoons as an intervention strategy to establish clear channels of communication between school and home and build positive relationships with parents. Various teachers across disciplines; September 2018-June 2019 Assistant Principal of Discipline, Principal and members of the Dean Team; Teacher teams Students and Parents. 0  3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Collaborative Teachers and strategies to promote teacher-parent/family collaborations in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Teachers will use the grade-team time to engage in KidTalk protocol one day a week, collaborating with their colleagues, guidance counselors, social workers, and paraprofessionals to identify at-risk students. Teachers will use the Tuesday Afternoon Parent-Engagement time to conduct parent meetings and outreach to ensure that families are consistently aware of their children’s progress towards skill mastery and credit accumulation. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Implement Common Planning (C6) structure for grade teams, PM School, Saturday Regents Prep, Prep classes during the day, funding teacher office hours, professional texts/literature. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. Grade-team leaders will meet bi-weekly with School Leadership to ensure that initiatives are communicated to teacher teachers, to share best practices with one another, and to conduct check-ins regarding team progress. Content leads will meet monthly with School Leadership to plan for upcoming professional development and ensure progress towards vertical skill alignment. By February, we will review January 2019 Regents data to assess progress towards meeting the specified goal. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. January 2019 Regents Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 1  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5D – Framework for Great Schools Element – Effective School Leadership: Principals lead by example and nurture the professional growth of teachers and staff, developing and delivering the instructional and social-emotional support that drives student achievement. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. To further promote coherence across instructional practices in grade-level classes, we are implementing grade-level teams as the teachers’ professional period. Teams will engage in a variety of processes including KidTalk, inquiry work including analysis of student work products, lesson study, planning for student initiatives/trips/incentives, and supporting the overall social, emotional, and academic development of students. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Effective School Leadership. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June 2019, 08X558 will provide teachers differentiated professional development opportunities to support planning practices around horizontal and vertical alignment of curricula, which will result in a 10% increase from 55% to 65% in the percentage of teachers who will agree or strongly agree that curriculum, instruction, and learning materials are well coordinated across different grade levels, measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 2  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Engage in formative observations to assess teacher lesson planning practices, including survey of lesson plans from teachers across disciplines and grade levels. All Teachers September -October 2018 Principal, Assistant Principals Leverage grade-level teams, content teams, and staff week to provide continued professional development for teachers around the Danielson Rubric and Framework for Great Schools. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals, Grade Teams Engage teachers in structured rounds of inter-visitations to provide Danielson-aligned feedback and next steps from colleagues in support of the development of coherent instruction and a culture that that values feedback and professional growth & reflection. Observations and observations reports with feedback and next steps aligned to Danielson (focus 1a/1e). Using previous cycle’s feedback and next steps to assess implementation of feedback and next steps in the following cycle of observations. All Teachers September 2018-June 2019 Grade & Content teams All Teachers October 2018-June 2019 Principal, Assistant Principals 3b – Parent and Family Engagement How will your school engage parents/families and support their understanding of Effective School Leadership and strategies to promote parent leadership and engagement in order to support their children at home? Include the timeline and identify key personnel responsible for implementation and oversight. Provide opportunities for families to engage in classroom visits throughout the school year to showcase classroom practices and curriculum including skills that families can emphasize at home to further support students’ skill required for academic success and college readiness. Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Monday professional development, August Staff Week, Chancellor’s PD days, after-school & outside professional development, coverages for teachers to attend PD during the school day, teachers’ professional periods. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP Title I TA Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant 3  C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring SIG PTA Funded In Kind Other Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will examine Advance data to assess progress improvement in teacher practice in Component 1e, with a goal of at least 5% increase in ratings by February 2019. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Advance Data Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 4  Section 5: Needs Assessment, Annual Goals, and Action Plans Section 5E – Framework for Great Schools Element – Strong Family and Community Ties: The school creates a welcoming environment for families and takes advantage of community resources to enrich the civic life of the school. Part 1 – Needs Assessment Briefly summarize your needs assessment by answering each question below using the most current summative and formative data trends relative to this Framework element. For example, data sources should include but are not limited to the Quality Review, NYSED School Report Card, NYC School Quality Guide, NYC School Survey, etc. Number responses accordingly. 1. What are the school’s strengths relative to this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. 2. What is the priority need(s) that will be addressed in the goal and action plan for this Framework element? Indicate the data trends, source and year. The School Quality Guide indicated that family and community engagement was an area of focus. In addition, parental feedback, through individual conversations and the Parent Association meeting, families expressed interest in increasing communication with school and partnering with the school in their child’s education. Part 2 – Annual Goal Indicate your school’s 2018-19 goal for improving student outcomes and school performance that addresses this element of the Framework for Great Schools–Strong Family and Community Ties. Your goal must be responsive to the identified priority need(s) indicated in Part 1, and be written as SMART–Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound. By June of 2019, 08X558 will actively conduct outreach to engage families in conversations about their child's progress, which will result in a 5% increase from 74% to 79% in the percentage of parents who will agree or strongly agree that the school staff regularly communicate with them about how parents can help their child learn measured by the results of the 2019 NYC School Survey. 5  Part 3a – Action Plan Activities/Strategies: Detail below the activities and strategies your school will implement to achieve the identified goal for this Framework for Great Schools element, including:  Evidence-based instructional programs, professional  development, and/or systems and structures needed to impact change. Strategies to address the needs of students with disabilities, English language learners, and other high-need student subgroups (e.g., overage/under-credited, SIFE, STH). Target Group(s) Who will be targeted? Timeline What is the start and end date? Key Personnel Who is responsible for implementing and overseeing the activity/strategy? Offer Campus-wide workshops, as determined by Campus PAs/PCs and feedback from families, to support families in partnering in their child’s education 9Once per month). Families Family Engagement events, including Family Night, annual Thanksgiving Potluck, student award ceremonies, college trips, family BBQ, etc. Families & Students Send quarterly newsletters to families with updates on events, workshops, and student progress Families September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 September 2018-June 2019 Campus Principals, Campus Parent Coordinators Principal, Assistant Principals, Teachers, Students, Family Engagement Committee, COSA Principal, Parent Coordinator Organize parent teacher conferences to allow for families to meet with child’s teachers for an overview of student’s progress. Teachers will share an area of strength, growth, and next steps for students across subject-areas. Families & Students November 2018-March 2019 Teachers, Family Engagement Committee 3b – Parent and Family Engagement If any, list the Community Based Organizations or other partnerships that support parent/family and community engagement. Indicate with N/A if not applicable. Peer Group Connection & Morningside Center Part 4 – Budget and Resource Alignment Part 4a. Indicate resources you will leverage to achieve this annual goal and implement this action plan, including human resources, instructional resources, schedule adjustments, etc. Professional literature for families, supplies for meetings and communication, Skedula, translation & interpretation services, parent coordinator, Family Engagement Team, transportation support. Part 4b. Indicate using an “X” the fund source(s) that will be utilized to support achievement of the specified goal. X Tax Levy X Title I SWP C4E 21st Century Grant Part 5 – Progress Monitoring Title I TA SIG Title II, Part A X Title III, Part A PTA Funded In Kind Title III, Immigrant Other 6  Part 5a. Schools are expected to engage in progress monitoring as part of an overall cycle of continuous improvement planning. Identify a mid-point benchmark(s) that will indicate school progress toward meeting the specified goal. We will use feedback from families to continue to further develop and refine the events and workshops for families and use it as a planning tool for future events. Part 5b. Indicate the specific instrument of measure that is used to assess progress. Feedback from Family Surveys; attendance from events. Part 5c. In February 2019, review progress towards meeting the annual goal and make adjustments to the action plan, if applicable. 7  Section 6: Academic Intervention Services (AIS) (Required for All Schools) Directions: Schools need to maintain accurate records of students who are receiving Academic Intervention Services (AIS) to ensure that students who are not achieving proficiency receive effective and timely assistance. These records need to be made available upon request and indicate the total number of students receiving AIS in each subject area listed below and for each applicable grade in your school. Method for delivery of service (e.g. small group, one-to-one, tutoring, etc.) When the service is provided (e.g. during the school day, before or after school, etc.) Small group & Whole class During the day and after school Type of Academic Intervention Service (AIS) English Language Arts (ELA) Criteria for determining AIS services (For additional guidance, refer to NYSED’s memo.) 1. IEP data 2. Anecdotal referrals from teachers 3. Performance on end-of-unit assessments Type of program or strategy (e.g. repeated readings, interactive writings, etc.) 1. Close and Interactive reading/ Annotation 2. After school targeted tutorial through the after-school enrichment/tutoring 4. Performance on 7 th and 8 th grade exams Mathematics 1. IEP data 2. Anecdotal referrals from teachers After school targeted tutorial through the after-school enrichment/tutoring Small Group & Whole Class During the day and after school 3. Performance end-of-unit assessments Science 4. Performance on Regents 1. IEP data 2. Anecdotal referrals from teachers 1. After school targeted tutorial through after-school enrichment/tutoring Small Group & Whole Class During the day and after school 3. Performance on end of unit assessments 2. Close and Interactive reading/ Annotation Social Studies 1. IEP data . After school targeted tutorial Small Group & Whole Class During the day and after school 8  2. Anecdotal referrals from teachers through after-school enrichment/tutoring 3. Performance on end of unit assessments 2. Close and Interactive reading/ Annotation At-risk services (e.g. provided by the Guidance Counselor, School Psychologist, Social Worker, etc.) 1. IEP data 2. Anecdotal data from teachers 3. Counseling referral form 1. One on one During and after school 2. Whole school/ small group 3. Small Group 4. Individual 5. Whole school/ small group 3. Saturday Academy 1. Counseling support provided by 2 Social Workers and one counselor 2. Dean/ culture support and reintegration behavior plans 3. Groups and clubs (young women/ men’s club, GSBA) 4. Utilization of Montefiore clinic counseling support 5. Mediation and peer mediation 9  Section 7: Support for Students in Temporary Housing (STH) Directions: - All Title I schools must complete Part A of this section. - All Non-Title I schools must complete Part B of this section. Supporting Students in Temporary Housing (STH) As included in your Office of School and Youth Development Consolidated Plan STH Section and in accordance with the federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act and Chancellor's Regulation A-780, schools must identify, serve, and report on students living in temporary housing (STH). For more information on using Title I set-aside funds to support your STH population, please refer to the Frequently Asked Questions document on DOE's website: http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8D99859A-AE04-40EA-A462-5363F87E67E9/0/FAQTitleISetAsideFY14.pdf Part A: FOR TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school. (Please note that your current STH population may not be the same as officially reported in DOE systems and may change over the course of the year.) 44 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population. We will provide students with the following services:  Counseling, 3 guidance counselors and 2 social workers, to provide counseling sessions in individual and group settings  PPT Team, including attendance teacher and social worker, to provide home visits for chronically absence students East Side House support services, with one student working with 10 highly at-risk students to re-engage or engage these students in school and provide social/emotional support  Morningside Center partnership to promote and support restorative justice practices  After-school enrichment opportunities  Mental Health Provider housed in Clinic, which also provides dental, vision, and medical services Funding designated to provide for school supplies, including uniforms, for students who meet this criteria Part B: FOR NON-TITLE I SCHOOLS 1. Please identify the number of Students in Temporary Housing who are currently attending your school (please note that your STH population may change over the course of the year). NA 2. Please describe the services you are planning to provide to the STH population with the Title I set-aside funds. 0  NA 3. Some Non-Title I schools receive a specific allocation based on the reported number of students living in temporary housing. If your school received an allocation (please refer to the current Title I Funds Summary of School Allocation Memorandum), include the amount your school received in this question. If your school did not receive an allocation and needs assistance in identifying resources to assist STH students, please contact an STH liaison. NA 1  Directions: Section 8: Title I Program Information  All Schools must indicate their Title I status in Part 1.  All elements of the All Title I Schools section must be completed in Part 2.  All Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools must also complete the TA Schools Only section in Part 3.  All Schoolwide Program (SWP) Schools must also complete the SWP Schools Only section in Part 4.  If a required component is addressed elsewhere in this plan, you may refer to the section(s) where the response can be found.  For additional information, visit the Title I Intranet webpage. Part 1: Title I Status Indicate with an “X” your school’s Title I Status. X Schoolwide Program (SWP) Targeted Assistance (TA) Schools Non-Title I Part 2: All Title I Schools 2a. Highly Qualified Teachers (HQT) Describe the strategies and activities including strategies for recruitment, retention, assignments, and support including high quality professional development that ensures staff is highly qualified. We have a multi-step interview process that involved a demonstration lesson, portfolio submission and two rounds of interviews to ensure candidates are qualified and committed to the school model. We create a professional learning community through department teams, inquiry teams, and teacher leader/ mentors that supports teacher development and has led to the development of high quality teachers. 2b. High Quality and Ongoing Professional Development Describe the activities and strategies for high quality professional development for teachers, principals, paraprofessionals, and staff that enable all students to meet Common Core State Standards (CCSS). Weekly professional development around CCLS and Danielson. We also have multiple leadership opportunities for staff. We also have a week long staff induction for teachers in the summer to prepare teachers for school opening. We are implementing a training program for paraprofessionals during our weekly PD meetings, and our model teachers serve as mentor new teachers. Our model teachers also participate in the Learning Partners Program thorough campus-wide PLCs Part 3: TA Schools Only 3a. Use of Program Resources Describe how the TA program resources will assist participating children to meet proficiency. N/A 3b. TA Coordination with the Regular Program Describe the planning, coordination and support of the TA program with the regular educational program (i.e., providing ELT, accelerated, high-quality curriculum, including applied learning; and minimize removing children from the regular classroom during regular school day). N/A 2  Part 4: SWP Schools Only 4a. Transition Plans to Assist Preschool Children (Elementary Schools Only) Describe the transition plans used to assist preschool children from early childhood programs to the elementary school program (e.g. aligned curriculum, joint PD & parent involvement activities, sharing of records/info, early intervention services, etc.). N/A 4b. Measures to Include Teachers in Decisions Regarding Assessments Describe the decision making process that teachers participate in regarding the use and selection of appropriate multiple assessment measures and the professional development provided regarding the use of assessment results to improve instruction. At WSA, all teachers participate in the departmental creation of college ready performance tasks which augment traditional exams modeled on state assessments. These performance tasks include argumentative and expository writing, group work process, presentations and lab work. We conduct summer PD to support new teachers in this process, and we have weekly departmental time to support this work throughout the year. 4c. “Conceptual” Consolidation of Funds in SWP Schools Directions: All Schoolwide Program (SWP) schools in NYC are conceptually consolidating their Federal, State, and Local funds, even though the Galaxy system reports the allocations in separate accounting codes1. To be eligible for the flexibility consolidation of Federal funds, a Schoolwide Program school must identify in its Schoolwide plan (CEP) which programs are included in its consolidation and the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool. Additionally, the school plan must document that it has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated2. On the chart below, indicate which Federal, State, and/or local Tax Levy program funds that are consolidated in your school’s Schoolwide Program, the amount each program contributes to the consolidated Schoolwide pool, and verification that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Program Name Fund Source (i.e. Federal, State or Local) Funding Amount Indicate the amount contributed to Schoolwide pool. (Refer to Galaxy for school allocation amounts) Place an (X) in Column A below to verify that the school has met the intent and purposes of each program whose funds are consolidated. Indicate in Column B, section references where a related program activity has been described in this plan. Column A Verify with an (X) Column B Section Reference(s) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 3,5 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Title I Part A (Basic) Title II, Part A Title III, Part A Title III, Immigrant Tax Levy (FSF) Federal Federal Federal Federal Local 464,465 0 12,366 0 4,482,032 x x x 3  1Explanation/Background: Title I Schoolwide Program schools are expected to use the flexibility available to them to integrate services and programs with the aim of enhancing the entire educational program and helping all students reach proficient and advanced levels of achievement. In addition to coordinating and integrating services, Schoolwide Program schools may combine most Federal, State and local funds to provide those services. By consolidating funds from Federal, State, and local sources, a Schoolwide Program school can address its needs using all its available resources. This gives a school more flexibility in how it uses available resources to meet the identified needs of all its students. Consolidating funds in a Schoolwide Program means that a school treats the funds it is consolidating like they are a single “pool” of funds. In other words, the funds from the contributing programs in the school lose their individual identity and the school has one flexible pool of funds. The school uses funds from this consolidated Schoolwide pool to support any activity of the Schoolwide Program without regard to which program contributed the specific funds used for a particular activity – so long as the use of funds meets the intent and purposes of the programs from which the funds originate. To consolidate funding in a Schoolwide Program, the school does not literally need to combine funds in a single account or pool with its own accounting code. Rather, the word “pool” is used conceptually to convey that a Schoolwide Program school has the use of all consolidated funds available to it for the dedicated function of operating a Schoolwide Program without regard to the identity of those funds. Consolidating Federal funds in a Schoolwide Program has the following additional advantages:  Consolidating Federal funds eases the requirements for accounting for funds from each specific program separately, because a Schoolwide school is not required to distinguish among funds received from different sources when accounting for their use.  A school that consolidates Federal funds in its Schoolwide Program is not required to meet most of the statutory and regulatory requirements of the specific Federal programs included in the consolidation (e.g., semi-annual time and effort reporting for Title I). However, the school must ensure that it meets the intent and purposes of the Federal programs included in the consolidation so that the needs of the intended beneficiaries are met. 2The intent and purposes of the Federal programs indicated on the chart above (Part 4c of this section) are as follows:  Title I, Part A – Schoolwide Programs: To upgrade the entire educational program in the school in order to improve the academic achievement of all students, particularly the lowest-achieving students. This includes provision of services for Students in Temporary Housing (STH).  Title I Priority and Focus School Improvement Funding: Support implementation of school improvement plans that aims to improve instruction and address the identified needs  Title II, Part A: Supplementary funding to improve student academic achievement by reducing class size in grades K, 1, 2, and 3, with an emphasis on grades with an average register greater than 20. If space is not available to form additional classes, funds may support push-in teacher(s) to supplement the instructional program.  Title III, Part A: To help ensure that children with limited English proficiency become proficient in English, develop high academic attainment in English, and meet the same challenging State academic content and achievement standards in the core academic subjects that all other children are expected to meet. Another purpose of this program is to increase the capacity of schools to establish, implement and sustain high-quality language instruction programs and English language development programs that assist schools in effectively teaching students with limited English proficiency. Title III, Part A is also designed to promote the participation of parents and communities of limited English proficient children in English language instruction programs.  Title III Immigrant: Supplementary and enhanced services to LEP/ELL immigrant students, in the areas of English language acquisition and content area achievement. Important Note: The following funds may not be consolidated: 4   Title I Parent Involvement Set-aside: Title I, Part A funds must support parent involvement activities and programs. Chancellor’s Regulation A-655 requires School Leadership Teams to consult with Title I parent representatives regarding the Title I program and the use of these funds. Parent involvement activities funded through Title I must be included in the Parent and Family Engagement Policy and aligned with student achievement goals in the school comprehensive educational plan. IDEA: To ensure that all children with disabilities have available to them a free appropriate public education designed to meet their individual needs.   Grant funds awarded via a competitive process: These funds must be used for the purposes specified by the Grantor, as described in the school’s approved grant application. 5  Section 9: Parent and Family Engagement Policy and School-Parent Compact (SPC) (Required for All Title I Schools) Directions: Title I schools are required to establish a Title I parent committee that will serve as the consultative and representative body for all Title I parents in the school regarding the Title I program. The Title I parent committee will participate with the School Leadership Team (SLT) in the joint review, planning, and improvement of the school’s Title I program. All Title I schools are required to have a Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson that develops a Parent and Family Engagement Policy in collaboration with the School Leadership Team that meets the parental involvement requirements of Title I. The Parent and Family Engagement Policy should describe how your school will plan and implement effective parent involvement activities and/or strategies to improve student academic achievement and school performance. The School-Parent Compact (SPC) is a component of the Parent and Family Engagement Policy that outlines how parents, the entire school staff, and students will share this responsibility. The activities and/or strategies included in your school’s Parent and Family Engagement Policy should align with current S/CEP goals for improving student achievement. Schools are encouraged to include feedback from the Parent Coordinator when updating the policy. In addition, if the school community will be engaged this year in central parent involvement initiatives, such as Parent Academy, which will provide training for school communities to help strengthen family-school partnerships, please be sure to include these activities in the school’s policy. Your school’s Title I Parent Representative or Parent Advisory Council Chairperson is encouraged to use the sample Parent and Family Engagement and SPC templates below (which meet federal Title I parental involvement requirements) as guidance for updating the school’s current policy. Parent and Family Engagement Policy Educational research shows a positive correlation between effective parental involvement and student achievement. The overall aim of this policy is to develop a parent involvement program that will ensure effective involvement of parents and community in the school. Westchester Square Academy (WSA), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is responsible for creating and implementing a parent involvement policy to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. The school’s policy is designed to keep parents informed by actively involving them in planning and decision-making in support of the education of their children. Parents are encouraged to actively participate on the School Leadership Team, Parent Association, and Title I Parent Committee as trained volunteers and welcomed members of the school community. The school’s Parent Involvement Policy was designed based upon a careful assessment of the needs of all parents/guardians, including parents/guardians of English Language Learners and students with disabilities. The school community will conduct an annual evaluation of the content and effectiveness of this parent involvement policy with Title I parents to improve the academic quality of the school. The findings of the evaluation through school surveys and feedback forms will be used to design strategies to more effectively meet the needs of parents, and enhance the school’s Title I program. This information will be maintained by the school. Support for Parents and Family Members of Title I Students WSA will support parents and families of Title I students by: ● providing materials and training to help parents work with their children to improve their achievement level, e.g., literacy, math and use of technology; 6  ● providing parents with the information and training needed to effectively become involved in planning and decision making in support of the education of their children; ● fostering a caring and effective home-school partnership to ensure that parents can effectively support and monitor their child’s progress; ● providing assistance to parents in understanding City, State and Federal standards and assessments; ● sharing information about school and parent related programs, meetings and other activities in a format, and in languages that parents can understand; ● providing professional development opportunities for school staff with the assistance of parents to improve outreach, communication skills and cultural competency in order to build stronger ties between parents and other members of the school community; Parental Involvement and School Quality In developing the Title I Parent Involvement Policy, parents of Title I participating students, parent members of the school’s Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association), as well as parent members of the School Leadership Team, were consulted on the proposed Title I Parent Involvement Policy and asked to survey their members for additional input. To increase and improve parent involvement and school quality, the school will: ● actively involve and engage parents in the planning, review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the school’s Title I program as outlined in the School Comprehensive Educational Plan, including the implementation of the school’s Title I Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact; ● engage parents in discussion and decisions regarding the required Title I set-aside funds, which are allocated directly to the school to promote parent involvement, including family literacy and parenting skills; ● ensure that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities and strategies as described in the school’s Parent Involvement Policy and the School-Parent Compact; ● support school-level committees that include parents who are members of the School Leadership Team, the Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee. This includes providing technical support and ongoing professional development, especially in developing leadership skills; ● maintain a Parent Coordinator (or a dedicated staff person) to serve as a liaison between the school and families. The Parent Coordinator or a dedicated staff person will provide parent workshops based on the assessed needs of the parents of children who attend the school and will work to ensure that the school environment is welcoming and inviting to all parents. The Parent Coordinator will also maintain a log of events and activities planned for parents each month and file a report with the central office.; ● conduct parent workshops with topics that may include: parenting skills, understanding educational accountability grade-level curriculum and assessment expectations; literacy, accessing community and support services; and technology training to build parents’ capacity to help their children at home; ● provide opportunities for parents to help them understand the accountability system, e.g., NCLB/State accountability system, student proficiency levels, Annual School Report Card, Progress Report, Quality Review Report, Learning Environment Survey Report; ● host the required Annual Title I Parent Meeting on or before December 1 st of each school year to advise parents of children participating in the Title I program about the school’s Title I funded program(s), their right to be involved in 7  the program and the parent involvement requirements under Title I, Part A, Section 1118 and other applicable sections under the No Child Left Behind Act; ● schedule additional parent meetings, e.g., quarterly meetings, with flexible times, such as meetings in the morning or evening, to share information about the school’s educational program and other initiatives of the Chancellor and allow parents to provide suggestions; ● translate all critical school documents and provide interpretation during meetings and events as needed; ● conduct an Annual Title I Parent Fair/Event where all parents are invited to attend formal presentations and workshops that address their student academic skill needs and what parents can do to help; Encouraging School-Level Parental Involvement The school will further encourage school-level parental involvement by: ● holding an annual Title I Parent Curriculum Conference; ● hosting educational family events/activities during Parent-Teacher Conferences and throughout the school year; ● encouraging meaningful parent participation on School Leadership Teams, Parent Association (or Parent-Teacher Association) and Title I Parent Committee; ● supporting or hosting Family Day events; ● establishing a Parent Resource Center/Area or lending library; instructional materials for parents; ● encouraging more parents to become trained school volunteers; ● providing written and verbal progress reports that are periodically given to keep parents informed of their children’s progress; ● developing and distributing a school newsletter or web publication designed to keep parents informed about school activities and student progress; ● providing school planners/folders for regular written communication between /teacher and the home in a format, and to the extent practicable in the languages that parents can understand School-Parent Compact (SPC) Westchester Square Academy (WSA), in compliance with the Section 1118 of Title I, Part A of the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, is implementing a School-Parent Compact to strengthen the connection and support of student achievement between the school and the families. Staff and parents of students participating in activities and programs funded by Title I, agree that this Compact outlines how parents, the entire school staff and students will share responsibility for improved academic achievement and the means by which a school-parent partnership will be developed to ensure that all children achieve State Standards and Assessments. I. School Responsibilities: High Quality Curriculum 8  Provide high quality curriculum and instruction consistent with State Standards to enable participating children to meet the State’s Standards and Assessments by: ● using academic learning time efficiently; ● respecting cultural, racial and ethnic differences; ● implementing a curriculum aligned to the Common Core State Learning Standards; ● offering high quality instruction in all content areas; ● providing instruction by highly qualified teachers and when this does not occur, notifying parents as required by the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act; Support home-school relationships and improve communication by: I. School Responsibilities: Supporting Home-School Relationships ● conducting parent-teacher conferences each semester during which the individual child’s achievement will be discussed as well as how this Compact is related; ● convening an Annual Title I Parent Meeting prior to December 1 st of each school year for parents of students participating in the Title I program to inform them of the school’s Title I status and funded programs and their right to be involved; ● arranging additional meetings at other flexible times, e.g., morning, evening and providing (if necessary and funds are available) transportation or child care for those parents who cannot attend a regular meeting; ● respecting the rights of limited English proficient families to receive translated documents and interpretation services in order to ensure participation in the child’s education; ● providing information related to school and parent programs, meetings and other activities is sent to parents of participating children in a format and to the extent practicable in a language that parents can understand; ● involving parents in the planning process to review, evaluate and improve the existing Title I programs, Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● providing parents with timely information regarding performance profiles and individual student assessment results for each child and other pertinent individual school information; ● ensuring that the Parent Involvement Policy and School-Parent Compact are distributed and discussed with parents each year; Provide parents reasonable access to staff by: I. School Responsibilities: Providing Parents Reasonable Access to Staff ● ensuring that staff will have access to interpretation services in order to effectively communicate with limited English speaking parents; 9  ● notifying parents of the procedures to arrange an appointment with their child’s teacher or other school staff member; ● arranging opportunities for parents to receive training to volunteer and participate in their child’s class, and to observe classroom activities; ● planning activities for parents during the school year, e.g., Parent-Teacher Conferences; I. School Responsibilities: Providing General Support to Parents Provide general support to parents by: ● creating a safe, supportive and effective learning community for students and a welcoming respectful environment for parents and guardians; ● assisting parents in understanding academic achievement standards and assessments and how to monitor their child’s progress by providing professional development opportunities (times will be scheduled so that the majority of parents can attend); ● sharing and communicating best practices for effective communication, collaboration and partnering will all members of the school community; ● supporting parental involvement activities as requested by parents; ● ensuring that the Title I funds allocated for parent involvement are utilized to implement activities as described in this Compact and the Parent Involvement Policy; ● advising parents of their right to file a complaint under the Department’s General Complaint Procedures and consistent with the No Child Left Behind Title I requirement for Elementary Secondary Education Act (ESEA) and Title I programs; Parent/Guardian Responsibilities: II. Parent/Guardian Responsibilities ● monitor my child’s attendance and ensure that my child arrives to school on time as well as follow the appropriate procedures to inform the school when my child is absent; ● ensure that my child comes to school rested by setting a schedule for bedtime based on the needs of my child and his/her age; ● check and assist my child in completing homework tasks, when necessary; ● read to my child and/or discuss what my child is reading each day (for a minimum of 15 minutes); ● set limits to the amount of time my child watches television or plays video games; 0  ● promote positive use of extracurricular time such as, extended day learning opportunities, clubs, team sports and/or quality family time; ● encourage my child to follow school rules and regulations and discuss this Compact with my child; ● volunteer in my child’s school or assist from my home as time permits; ● participate, as appropriate, in the decisions relating to my child’s education; ● communicate with my child’s teacher about educational needs and stay informed about their education by prompting reading and responding to all notices received from the school or district; ● respond to surveys, feedback forms and notices when requested; ● become involved in the development, implementation, evaluation and revision to the Parent Involvement Policy and this Compact; ● participate in or request training offered by the school, district, central and/or State Education Department learn more about teaching and learning strategies whenever possible; ● take part in the school’s Parent Association or Parent-Teacher Association or serve to the extent possible on advisory groups, e.g., Title I Parent Committees, School or District Leadership Teams; ● share responsibility for the improved academic achievement of my child; Student Responsibilities: III. Student Responsibilities ● attend school regularly and arrive on time; ● complete my homework and submit all assignments on time; ● follow the school rules and be responsible for my actions; ● show respect for myself, other people and property; ● try to resolve disagreements or conflicts peacefully; ● always try my best to learn. 1 Division of English Language Learners and Student Support Milady Baez, Deputy Chancellor 52 Chambers Street, Room 209 New York, New York 10007 Phone: 212-374-6072 http://schools.nyc.gov/Academics/ELL/default.htm Title III Supplemental Program for ELLs for the 2018-19 SY Directions: Title III supplemental services for ELLs must include all of the following three components: 1. 2. 3. The Title III supplemental instructional services must be based on student need These supplemental services should complement core bilingual and ESL services required under CR Part 154. Direct supplemental services should be provided for before school, after school, and Saturday programs. Teachers providing the services must be certified bilingual education and/or ESL teachers. Direct instruction: activities must be used to support language development, English and native language instruction, high academic achievement in math, and/or other core academic areas. 1. 2. 3. 4. High quality professional development that is “of sufficient intensity and duration to have a positive and lasting impact on the teachers’ performance in classrooms.” 1. Professional development activities should be well-planned, ongoing events rather than one-day or short-term workshops and conferences. Parent engagement and supports must ensure that there are appropriate translation and interpretation services to meet community needs. 1. These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. NOTE: The Title III program planning ratio is as follows: 60% direct to instruction, 10% to parental involvement, 10% to professional development, and 20% to OTPS. For more information on Title III requirements, please see the School Allocation Memo or contact your Senior ELL Compliance and Performance Specialist. Any updates or revisions to this plan must be made through the iPlan portal by June 30. Part A: School Information Name of School: This school is (check one): DBN: conceptually consolidated (skip part E below) NOT conceptually consolidated (must complete part E below) Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information The direct instruction component of the program will consist of (check all that apply): Before school After school Saturday academy Total # of ELLs to be served: Grades to be served by this program (check all that apply): 1 7 2 8 K 6 4 10 Total # of teachers in this program: # of certified ESL/Bilingual teachers: # of content area teachers: 3 9 5 11 12 2  Part B: Direct Instruction Supplemental Program Information Describe the direct instruction supplemental program here and include the · · · · · · rationale subgroups and grade levels of students to be served schedule and duration language of instruction # and types of certified teachers types of materials 1 ENL after school course designed for&nbsp;9th-12th grade students (Entering and Begin description here: Our ELLs are given a tremendous amount of information, without the literacy skills needed to access content in nearly every subject area. They are also scoring the lowest on state mandated exams. We would like to propose a course that addresses literacy issues including: <!--{cke_protected}%3Cmeta%20charset%3D%22utf-8%22%20%2F%3E--> · 1 ENL after school course designed for 9th -10th grade SIFE students who need to learn phonics and sight words. We will use the Reading Rewards intermediate book (Voyager), Edge Reading, Writing &amp; Language textbooks (Hampton and Brown 2014), and Brainpop ESL. · Emerging on the NYSESLAT) who need basic language skills and already possess native language literacy skills. We will use the Edge Reading, Writing &amp; Language textbooks (Hampton and Brown 2014) and Brainpop ESL. They will learn new vocabulary, read a text around a theme, recognize grammar patterns, and write sentences using grammar. · 1 ENL after school survival skills language course designed for beginner level 9th-12th grade &nbsp;ESL students (scored Entering and Emerging on the NYSESLAT) to utilize their language skills outside of school. They will learn how to navigate the city using public transportation and bikes, asking for directions, speaking with representatives of institutions including libraries, postal workers, restaurants, hospitals, and other locations around the city. They will practice asking questions in each scenario, and learn common sentence frames used to ask for clarification. 1 ENL after school course designed for 9th -10th grade SIFE students who need to learn phonics and sight words. We will use the Reading Rewards intermediate book (Voyager), Edge Reading, Writing & Language textbooks (Hampton and Brown 2014), and Brainpop ESL. 1 ENL after school course designed for 9th-12th grade students (Entering and Emerging on the NYSESLAT) who need basic language skills and already possess native language literacy skills. We will use the Edge Reading, Writing & Language textbooks (Hampton and Brown 2014) and Brainpop ESL. They will learn new vocabulary, read a text around a theme, recognize grammar patterns, and write sentences using grammar. 1 ENL after school survival skills language course designed for beginner level 9th-12th grade ESL students (scored Entering and Emerging on the NYSESLAT) to utilize their language skills outside of school. They will learn how to navigate the city using public transportation and bikes, asking for directions, speaking with representatives of institutions including libraries, postal workers, restaurants, hospitals, and other locations around the city. They will practice asking questions in each scenario, and learn common sentence frames used to ask for clarification. Each will be taught by a certified ESL teacher 2 times a week for an hour each. The student to teacher ratio will be no more than 10:1. Instruction will be provided on Tuesdays and Thursdays, from 2:45 - 3:45 pm, for a maximum of 48 sessions each After-School activity. The program will be operational over 12 weeks, each semester. Attendance and student's progress will be monitored and kept on file, in the school's Title III LEP binder. 3  rationale teachers to receive training schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider Part C: Professional Development Describe the school’s professional development program for Title III Program teachers as well as other staff responsible for delivery of instruction and services to ELLs. · · · · · Begin description here: RATIONALELiteracy cannot be a barrier to learning for our ELLs. The majority of students enrolled in our ENL standalone course are reading below a 3rd grade reading level, yet they are often given texts well above their reading proficiency level making content inaccessible in core content classes. Our ELL population includes long term ELLs who have not progressed with their reading skills and students who struggle with phonics and sight words, and were never identified as SIFE students in their previous schools. As such, ELL instructors are looking to attend workshops and training sessions that address needs of struggling readers for high school students for Tier II and Tier III students who need more targeted reading instruction via professional development workshops offered through the New York City Department of Education. Two ENL teachers will be attending 2 full day sessions focused on literacy offered by NYCDOE offered at no cost to current teachers, by the Division of English Language Learners, DELLSS. Additionally, ENL teachers and AP (ENL/English) will attend the monthly Liaison PD sessions offered by the Bronx FSC. Attending/participating teachers will have the opportunity to turn-key during the English/ENL Department PD sessions. Attendance at PDs are confirmed by NYCDOE presenters, and agendas and other materials will be made available online following each workshop. WSA ENL teachers will debrief each workshop during our weekly content meeting, and organize professional development workshops on building literacy skills for ELLs during the Fall semester, and early Spring semester. Topics and schedule will be determined at a later time. rationale schedule and duration topics to be covered name of provider how parents will be notified of these activities Part D: Parental Engagement Activities Describe the parent engagement activities targeted toward parents of ELLs that will impact higher achievement for ELLs. NOTE: These are in addition to mandated activities, such as parent orientation during ELL identification process. · · · · · Begin description here: NEWCOMERS ORIENTATION 1In our experience, immigrant parents are unaware of education policies and requirements that affect their children’s education. Immigrant parents are also unaware of the resources available to them. The ENL team is proposing newcomers’ orientations including both the students and their parents. The orientation will include information (with translation) on the following: · · and class assessments) · http://www.nysed.gov/common/nysed/files/mls-quicksheet-updated-1_19_18.pdfNYSITELLIRLANYSESLATRegentsiReady Graduation Requirements Accommodations for ELLs (bilingual dictionary and extra time for testing on state exams Mandatory testing of ELLs:Native Language proficiency: 4  Native Language proficiency: http://www.nysed.gov/common/nysed/files/mls-Immigrant Family Rights and Resources Native Language proficiency: http://www.nysed.gov/common/nysed/files/mls-NYSITELL IRLA NYSESLAT Regents iReady Attendance Translation services in schools and hospitals Tour of Lehman Campus and key staff members (Montefiore, Principal, APs, Part D: Parental Engagement Activities · quicksheet-updated-1_19_18.pdf · · · · · · · · Counselors, Social Workers, Teachers by team, ESL teachers) · · quicksheet-updated-1_19_18.pdf · · · · · NEWCOMERS ORIENTATION 2We would like our immigrant parents to feel a part of the WSA school community, to get to know one another, and learn about one another. We are proposing an all day event beginning with ice breakers at school, continuing with a trip to the Bronx Zoo, and a picnic or lunch before Thanksgiving weekend. LOGISTICSWe will identify students who arrived in the past 9 months, and provide both letters and phone calls announcing the orientation, which will take place during Curriculum Night on September 26th from 6pm-8pm. We will have parents sign in, and provide them with both an agenda and orientation materials, translated into Arabic, Bengali, and Spanish. Attendance and Sign-in documentation will be kept on file in the Parent Outreach binder. NYSITELL IRLA NYSESLAT Regents iReady Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. NA Professional salaries (schools must account for fringe benefits) 1. 2. Purchased services 1. Per session Per diem High quality staff and curriculum development contracts. NA $NA Supplies and materials 2. Must be supplemental. NA NA 5  Part E: Budget FOR SCHOOLS NOT CONCEPTUALLY CONSOLIDATED ONLY. Ensure that your Title III budget matches your Title III Plan. Allocation Amount: $ Budget Category Budgeted Amount Explanation of expenditures in this category as it relates to the program narrative for this title. 3. 4. Additional curricula, instructional materials. Must be clearly listed. Educational Software (Object Code 199) Travel Other TOTAL NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 6  DIVISION OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS AND STUDENT SUPPORT GRADES K-12 LANGUAGE ALLOCATION POLICY SUBMISSION FORM 2017-18 AND 2018-19 SCHOOL YEAR DIRECTIONS: This submission form supports schools with organizing and describing the quantitative and qualitative information necessary for a well-conceived school-based Language Allocation Policy (LAP) that describes high quality programs for English language learners (ELL). This is a two-year plan on how schools will support ELLs’ linguistic and academic needs. This LAP form is a part of the school’s Comprehensive Educational Plan (CEP). Note: this is a living document; any schoolwide changes involving the services of ELLs, such as the addition or expansion of a transitional bilingual education (TBE) or dual language (DL) program should be updated in this form. Agendas, minutes of LAP meetings, and LAP team members’ attendance at meetings should be kept readily available on file in the school. When preparing your school’s submission, provide extended responses in the available spaces. For additional information, refer to the English Language Learner Policy & Reference Guide. Part I: School ELL Profile A. School Information District 08 School Name Westchester Square Academy Borough Bronx School Number 558 B. Language Allocation Policy Team Composition NOTE: The following staff members should be on the LAP team: principal, assistant principal (where applicable), at least one bilingual teacher from each subject area (where there is a bilingual program), at least one ENL teacher, and one parent. Principal Yira Salcedo Coach N/A ENL (English as a New Language)/Bilingual Teacher Patricia Chang Teacher/Subject Area Stephanie Aquino Teacher/Subject Area Yasmin Garves Related-Service Provider Mark Virella Superintendent Carron Staple Assistant Principal Kristen Schaefer Coach N/A School Counselor Marluan Vargas Parent N/A Parent Coordinator Bielka Payano Field Support Center Staff Member Loveena Thomas Other (Name and Title) C. Teacher Qualifications Provide a report of all staff members’ certifications referred to in this section. Press TAB after each number entered to calculate sums and percentages. Number of certified ENL teachers currently teaching in the ENL program Number of teachers who hold both content area/common branch and TESOL certification 2 2 1 Number of certified bilingual teachers not currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified foreign language/world language teachers providing home language arts (HLA) to students in bilingual programs [applicable to grades 7–12] Number of teachers currently teaching a self-contained ENL class who hold both a common branch license and TESOL certification [applicable to grades K–6] 1 0 Number of teachers who hold both a bilingual extension and TESOL certification Number of special education teachers with bilingual extensions 0 0 Number of certified bilingual teachers currently teaching in a bilingual program Number of certified ENL teachers not currently teaching in the ENL program 0 1 D. Student Demographics Total number of students in school (excluding pre-K) 642 7 Total number of ELLs 71 ELLs as share of total student population (%) 11.06%  Part II: ELL Demographics A. ELL Programs This school serves the following grades (includes ELLs and non-ELLs) Check all that apply This school offers (check all that apply): K 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Transitional bilingual education program (TBE) Yes NoDual language program (DL) Freestanding ENL Yes NoYes No If yes, indicate language(s): If yes, indicate language(s): Provide the number of bilingual programs for each grade at your school. Each language within the bilingual program is considered a separate program. TBE=transitional bilingual education; DL=dual language. Bilingual Program Breakdown School Year Lang. Opened (e.g., 2013-14) K 0 1 2 3 4 Program TBE TBE TBE DL DL DL Total Part III: Assessment Analysis 0 0 0 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Tot # 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 After reviewing and analyzing the assessment data, answer the following: 1. What formative assessments or curriculum-embedded assessments (e.g., EL SOL, Estrellita, Fountas and Pinnell, DRA, TCRWP, teacher-created assessments) are being used to guide instructional planning for your ELLs? To assess the early literacy skills of our ELLs, we use a diagnostic assessment and NYSESLAT data. In addition, all students are assessed using FRY sight word evaluation during the first week of school (Entering and Emerging ENL) NewsELA baseline assessments (Entering and Emerging ENL) to gauge reading level Writing skills evaluation for analysis of student’s use of basic punctuation, grammar, and conventions (Entering and Emerging ENL) Additionally, teachers will record observations of student work and interactions to assess the four major skills (speaking, listening, reading, writing) during the first 10 days of school The data from these assessments indicates whether the students are writing and reading several levels below their own grade and in need of writing and reading support. Upon receiving information about the student, the teachers are required to better support the ELLs in all areas, working alone and in collaboration with our ENL team. 8  2. What structures do you have in place to support this effort? Grade teams will collaborate daily to ensure that students are making progress in language acquisition. This will include engaging in inquiry cycles to examine student work and Scholarship/Regents data to then make adjustments in teacher practice and support student skill progression. 3. What summative assessments or baseline/benchmark assessments (e.g., NYC performance Tasks, Performance Series, ELL Periodic Assessment, HLA Assessment) are being used to identify baseline, progress and areas of need? We will evaluate the success of our programs for ELLs by examining the data from our end-of-unit assessments, NYSESLAT, and ELA Regents exams. In addition, Entering and Emerging students complete FRY sight word evaluation, NewsELA baseline reading assessments, and writing skills assessment of basic punctuation, grammar, and conventions (Entering and Emerging ENL). The data should indicate improved reading and writing proficiency scores for ELL students, an increase in the number of ELL students advancing to the next proficiency level, an in increase in the number of ELLs on track in terms of credit accumulation, and an increase in the number of ELLs earning 65% or higher in the Regents exams. 4. What structures do you have in place to address interventions once the summative data has been gathered? Grade teams will collaborate daily, and with ENL teachers quarterly to ensure that students are making progress in language acquisition. This will include engaging in inquiry cycles to examine student work and Scholarship/Regents data to then make adjustments in teacher practice and support student skill progression. 5. How does your school use data to guide instruction for ELLs within the Response to Intervention (RtI) framework (for grades K-5). [Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Support Services for ELLs (RTI and AIS) section and RtI Guide for Teachers of ELLs.] N/A 6. What outcome assessments (e.g., NYSELAT, ELA, Math, Regents) data are used to evaluate and inform your ELL programs? ([Refer to the ELL Data Analysis Tool and RLAT from ATS]. Upon analysis of the NYSESLAT scores, there is a distinct pattern that students are achieving proficiency or advanced proficiency in their listening and speaking scores; however, students are unable to attain higher than advanced proficiency in reading and writing. In particular, there are a number of ELLs that are advanced or proficient in listening and speaking, but are designated as intermediates due to their reading and writing scores. This pattern is consistent for each grade level. Another common pattern is that we have several students who enter the school having not "tested out" of ENL despite displaying strong English language skills as evidenced by their speaking, reading, writing and class grades. Upon completion of each part of the NYSESLAT, these students often "test out." It is evident that from our NYSESLAT scores our ELL population is proficient in verbal skills however lack reading and writing skills. These skill sets are addressed by all of our teachers, who create a skills-based curriculum, but also our ENL team, who consult with teachers about how best to provide support for ELLs. 7. What structures do you have in place to disseminate these findings in order to make adjustments to your programs? The ENL coordinator will work in conjunction with ENL teachers, the SPED coordinator, and grade teams. On a quarterly basis, they will go over ENL data including: Each student’s proficiency level Scaffolding or teaching strategies to address student needs at each level of proficiency Testing accommodations Academic progress Grade teams will collaborate daily to ensure that students are making progress in language acquisition. This will include engaging in inquiry cycles to examine student work and Scholarship/Regents data to then make adjustments in teacher practice and support student skill progression. Part IV: ELL Programming 9  Programming and Scheduling Information 1. How is instruction for ELLs delivered in the following programs? Include how integrated and standalone ENL are implemented as per CR Part 154.2 as well as how students are grouped (e.g., block [class travels together as a group], ungraded [all students regardless of grade are in one class], heterogeneous [mixed proficiency levels], homogeneous [proficiency level is the same in one class]). a. Freestanding ENL program. The English language instruction is delivered in both ELA and History courses as well as a stand-alone section of Academic Language & Literacy for ENL students requiring standalone minutes. Based on NYSESLAT data, students are programmed into the appropriate classes given the required number of minutes for their level as per CR154. Students take classes within heterogeneous groupings and may or may not be placed with other ELLs in classes outside of the English and History courses. In all classes, students receive instruction daily that addresses all four modalities of listening, speaking, reading and writing. In stand-alone ENL classes for Entering & Emerging students, ample scaffolds are provided to support language acquisition & development. In addition, students have access to language tools (image-based translation technology, speech-to-text and text-to-speech applications) while native language support is provided when necessary. The students have access to bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Furthermore, native language textbooks and novel are made available to help them maintain grade level proficiency in their first language. Students are provided with instruction that is designed to support them in English language arts as well as their other content areas. Lessons are geared towards strategies that assist them with reading and writing as well as academic vocabulary development. b. TBE program. If applicable. B. N/A c. DL program. If applicable. N/A 2. How does the school ensure the mandated number of instructional minutes is provided according to proficiency levels in each program model? a. How are explicit ENL, ELA, and HLA instructional minutes delivered in each program model (see charts 5.1 and 5.2 below)? Entering & Emerging: Standalone + Integrated ELA/ENL Transitioning: Integrated ELA/ENL or History (Global, US History, Government) Expanding: Integrated ELA/ENL or History (Global, US History, Government) Commanding: Integrated ELA/ENL or History (Global, US History, Government) High levels of communication between ENL coordinator and the school principal/programmer are ensured during the Spring programming process, to ensure that all ELL needs are met. In addition, in the Fall, newly updated NYSESLAT data was reviewed by the ENL Coordinator and in collaboration with the assistant principal and guidance counselors, students’ programs were reviewed and finalized to ensure compliance. 3. Describe how core content is delivered in each program model. Specify language, and the instructional approaches and methods used to make content comprehensible to foster language development and meet the demands of the Common Core Learning Standards. In our program model, all English language learners receive content-area instruction in a general education setting. Students are placed in heterogeneous groups, and instruction is delivered utilizing the SIOP method, that focuses primarily on content but provides scaffolds and differentiation when necessary. Native language support is provided through the use of bilingual glossaries and dictionaries. Also, students are permitted to provide translation assistance to each other when needed. To support these classes, the ENL teacher offers suggestions for possible scaffolds or differentiation and alternative means of assessment. The ENL teacher meets with selected students daily to support needed areas and collaborative plans with content-area teachers to ensure that lessons include language development goals as well as support students in achieving mastery in the specific content areas. Teachers meet daily during common planning time, including time to discuss ELLs and 0  their success or lack of success in individual classes. Collaborative planning between all teachers on the grade level as well as between the co-teachers ensures that all students are pushed to achieve at high levels of mastery for NYS standards. 4. How do you ensure that ELLs are appropriately evaluated in their home languages throughout the year? ELLs are evaluated in their native language at intake and are all assessed using the NYSITELL if appropriate. Spanish-speaking newcomers take the Spanish LAB to assess their Spanish proficiency. Our LOTE teacher assesses the native language proficiency of our incoming 9th graders and our new admits whose first language is Spanish with a DYO diagnostic exam. We seek to develop a proficiency exam for our minority language groups, such as Arabic or Italian, in conjunction with the City's Translation Unit. 5. How do you differentiate instruction for each of the following ELL subgroups? SIFE a. b. Newcomer c. Developing d. e. Long Term Former ELLs up to two years after exiting ELL status Instruction is set up to meet the needs of all proficiency classifications: SIFE, newcomers, long-term ELLs and former ELLs. Instructional materials in all content areas are in both languages (Spanish and English), dictionaries and glossaries are available and, when needed, audio materials are provided. Technology is integrated into daily lessons through the use of SMART boards and software on laptop computers. Also, after school activities and tutoring sessions are offered to all ELLs through our WSA after-school tutoring.A. Students who are identified as SIFE receive ENL instruction in order to provide individualized attention in the ENL stand-alone couress. SIFE are also encouraged to participate in after school tutoring designed to support them in their content area classes. B. Newcomers are engaged in challenging theme-based curriculum which builds vocabulary and academic concepts. Also, the culture, native language, and life experience of the students are outlined in instructional units. These activities are set up to build students' academic English proficiency through scaffolded instruction. Classroom discourse is arranged in a manner to promote and develop language acquisitions and academic concepts.C. ELLs who have received services from 4 to 6 years receive similar instruction as newcomers; however, the work is more rigorous and fewer scaffolds are used. Higher expectations are placed in these students to ensure their transition to general education classes without ESL services. Students are engaged in reading and writing activities closer to their grade-level counterparts, with close attention to the acquisition of Tier II academic language. After school tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content area classes. D. Long term ELL instruction differs slightly from that of 4 to 6 year ELLs. While still rigorous, the program focuses on the students' acquisition of academic language, phonetic awareness, reading and writing strategies, and organization skills. After school tutoring is available to these students to receive additional help with their content area classes.E. Students are immersed in general education curriculum that supports their growth in academic language and content. These students are exposed to language and vocabulary that continues to accelerate their growth. Students are afforded opportunities to receive individualized support before/after school and during lunch. In addition, through thoughtful lesson planning with strategic differentiation, students receive materials that are appropriate to support their continued language development and progress towards mastery. 6. What instructional strategies and grade-level materials do teachers of ELL-SWDs use that both provide access to academic content areas and accelerate English language development? ELLs who are also classified as students with disabilities are programmed according to their proficiency levels and their IEPs. Our ENL Coordinator and teacher regularly review student academic performance and to provide the necessary intervention services. In addition, they hold conferences, by phone or in person, to communicate these needs to our students' families. All of our ELL students are treated as individuals, regardless of NYSESLAT scores or special learning needs. We program students and offer services depending on individual student needs. Several after school programs not only offer Regents preparation and opportunities for credit accumulation, but also offer students the opportunity to refine their skills. Students are provided with access to a computer lab and are exposed to technology on a daily basis. 7. How does your school use curricular, instructional, and scheduling flexibility to enable ELL-SWDs to achieve their IEP goals and attain English proficiency within the least restrictive environment? 1  All students are programmed to ensure the compliance mandates are met; most classes are ICT and/or Integrated ENL and ICT. This allows for students to receive the appropriate minutes as well as the necessary supports as ELL-SWDs. In grade teams and co-teaching partnerships, teachers collaborate to share strategies, strategically plan, and ensure that the lessons are providing multiple opportunities for students to be successful in achieving mastery. Furthermore, the ENL and IEP Coordinators collaborate to ensure that shared strategies and differentiation techniques are effectively used to support students in the classroom. 8. Describe your targeted intervention programs for ELLs in ELA, math, and other core content areas (specify ELL subgroups targeted). List the range of intervention services offered in your school for the above areas as well as the language(s) in which they are offered. The performance of ELLs is closely monitored in ELA, math, history, and science via case conferences, team and grade meetings and analysis of data. Weekly common planning including collaboration between ESL teachers and teachers of other disciplines is included to target ELL needs. In-class conferences, after-school tutoring, parent conferences, guidance counselor support, Saturday Academy, and other before and after school programs provide targeted interventions to support ENL students in achieving academic success. 9. Based on data and trends, what new programs or improvements will be considered for the upcoming school year? Our school will seek to provide further native language support for the students. In particular, Spanish speakers could receive native literacy instruction from the Spanish foreign language teacher. 10. If you had a bilingual program, what was the reason you closed it? At present, no programs/services are being discontinued. 11. How are ELLs afforded equal access to all school programs? Describe after school and supplemental services offered to ELLs in your building. ELLs are afforded equal access to all school programs. Students can participate in all extra-curricular activities and tutoring. Tutoring is provided for all major subjects after school. ELLs are encouraged to attend these after school sessions. ELLs are afforded the opportunity to receive tutoring on a daily basis via our after-school program specifically for language and literacy development with one of our ENL teachers. During tutoring, students are provided with skills, strategies, or additional time to complete assignments for ESL and other content area classes. We also offer Saturday Academy for 6 weeks prior to the Regents in January and June to ensure that students have an opportunity to find success on the NYS Regents Exams. 12. What instructional materials, including technology, are used to support ELLs? Include core content area as well as language materials; list ELL subgroups if necessary. A variety of instructional materials are used to support the ELL population. Technology is utilized with all ELL classes through the use of SMART boards. In addition, the students use language and literacy software. To support the students' native languages in standalone ENL courses and in content areas, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are also made available. Students have access to computers to use Google Translate or other web-based translator programs. When available, books on CD and textbooks in the native language are provided. 13. How is home language support assessed and delivered in each program model (DL, TBE, and ENL)? Currently, the only model our school provides for English acquisition is Freestanding ENL. During scheduled periods for all proficiency levels, native language support is provided through the availability of bilingual dictionaries and glossaries. Depending on availability, native language texts are a part of our classroom library. Furthermore, students are permitted to communicate in their native language with their peers when translation is needed. 14. Explain how the school ensures all required services/resources support and correspond to ELLs’ ages and grade levels. At our school, required support and resources correspond to ELLs' ages and grade levels. First, students are placed in upgraded classes for ENL. As in most high schools, students receive their daily content-area instruction based on credit accumulation. Novels, textbooks, and computer-based resources are all targeted to our ELLs interest level. Instruction during ENL classes is often differentiated based on the needs of the students. During grade team ELLs needs are discussed. Team leaders meet with guidance counselors to ensure correct programming is in place. 2  A variety of instructional materials are used to support the ELL population. Technology is utilized with all ELL classes through the use of SMART boards. In addition, the students use language and literacy software. To support the students' native languages in ESNLand in content areas, bilingual dictionaries and glossaries are also made available. Students have access to computers to use Google Translate or other web-based translator programs. When available, books on CD and textbooks in the native language are provided. 15. If your school shares a building (collocation), how do you share resources and/or coordinate efforts to ensure that all of the ELLs’ needs (academic, linguistic, socioemotional) are met? n/a 16. Describe activities in your school that assist newly enrolled ELLs before the beginning of the school year. Include activities for new ELLs who enroll throughout the school year. Include titles of school staff involved in such activities (e.g., school counselor, parent coordinator). Currently there are not any activities in our school to assist newly enrolled ELL students before the beginning of the school year. However, all incoming students are invited to attend the Summer Bridge Program, College Now, and other before and after school programs that are offered to all WSA students. Our ENL coordinator is responsible for connecting students to these activities. 17. What language electives are offered to ELLs? Spanish are offered as language electives for ELLs. In addition, some students have taken the Spanish LOTE exam. 18. For schools with dual language programs: a. What dual language model is used (e.g., side-by-side, self-contained)? Explain how much of the instructional day (percentage) EPs and ELLs are integrated. In which language(s) is each core content area taught? b. c. How is each language separated for instruction? d. Is emergent literacy taught in the child’s home language first (sequential), or are both languages taught at the same time (simultaneous)? N/A Professional Development and Support for School Staff 1. Describe the professional development plan for all ELL personnel at the school. (Include all teachers of ELLs and non-pedagogic staff.) What professional development is offered to teachers of ELLs (including ENL and bilingual teachers) in supporting ELLs as they engage in the Common Core Learning Standards? ENL teachers will provide meet with grade level teams and SPED coordinator on a quarterly basis. The pedagogical and administrative staff, through PD, will go over: Co-teaching plan What ELLs can do at their respective proficiency levels Lesson planning: what scaffolds and accommodations can best aid student comprehension or skills practice during the beginning, middle, and end of each lesson Testing accommodations Grouping strategies (when to use heterogeneous and homogeneous groupings) Best practices to support ELLs within a grade team Helping ELLs organize their work By sharing these strategies, ENL students will be supported with common routines and strategies that will allow them to develop language and skills. Strategies used, but not limited to include: Differentiated instruction based on students ability, proficiency levels and learning styles, Quality Teaching for English Learners, Use of Point of Entry Model/Balanced Literacy, 3  varied learning modalities, ongoing assessment, varied assessments tools, Assessment for Learning Strategies and Scaffolding instruction across all content areas. 2. Describe how your school meets the professional development requirements as per CR Part 154.2: 15% of total hours for all teachers and 50% of total hours for bilingual education/ENL teachers receive ELL-specific professional development. Include how records are kept for professional development activities (e.g. agendas, attendance). Refer to ELL Policy and Reference Guide, Professional Development section. To assist ELLs as they transition from middle school to high school, we provide staff with professional development to help them analyze NYSESLAT scores and the state ELA and mathematics assessments to determine how to best address the needs of these incoming students. In addition, in content area teams, the staff will conduct a gap analysis of the reading and writing demands between middle school and high school, and what instruction will best bridge the gap for our incoming ELLS. For the minimum 7.5 hours of ELL training for all staff is introduced to understand and analyze the NYSESLAT scores. Since our ELLs receive content-area instruction in general education classes, the staff is presented with best practices for ELLs in their content areas. Topics to be delivered are:- Literacy Across the Curriculum- Technology Resources that support literacy- using SQR3- teachers and writers collaborative: strategies for writing- methods for fair assessment- strategies and scaffolds for content-area classes- understanding the NYSESLAT performance levels- the use of the SMART board and technology for language learning Records are maintained through the collection of attendance, which are kept on file with the ENL coordinator. Copies of the PowerPoint slide presentations are kept online in Google Docs. Hard copies of these presentations are also kept on file with the ENL coordinator. Parental Involvement 1. How does the school provide annual individual meetings with parents of ELLs to discuss goals of the program, language development progress, language proficiency assessment results, and language development needs in all content areas? Include provisions for interpretation and translation as needed. Note these meetings do not include mandated parent orientation meetings and DOE-scheduled parent-teacher conferences? We encourage participation of all parents for all school activities, which include but are not limited to:- parent teacher conferences- various workshops on the school campus that are differentiated for parents/families needs- continued outreach to families during the Tuesday Parent Engagement time to allow for phone calls and communication to share students' progress, areas of celebration, and areas of concern. During all parent functions translation services are available and all correspondences are sent home in Spanish as well. 2. Describe ELL parent involvement in your school. Include specific activities that foster parental involvement for parents of ELLs. Our parent coordinator surveys parents needs at the start of the school year by giving a Workshop Survey. During the course of the year we try to support the parents' expressed needs and interests from the survey results. Additionally, parents receive a survey for their preferred language of communication. This assists the parent coordinator in determining which languages that correspondences from the school need to be translated. Additionally, all events and parent workshops are listed on our school's website and includes a translator tab to translate the website into other languages. Given the responses on the survey as well as interactions with ELL parents, workshops specifically designed to support ELL families are developed and implemented throughout the year in collaboration with the ENL Coordinator, Parent Coordinator, Guidance Team, and School Staff. Additional Information Include any additional information that would be relevant to your LAP and would further explain and highlight your program for ELLs. You may attach/submit charts. This form does not allow graphics and charts to be pasted. N/A 4  5 Part V: ELL Identification Attestation Principal Certification 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. In accordance with New York State’s Commissioner’s Regulations Part 154 as outlined and implemented in the New York City’s ELL Policy and Reference Guide, I, Yira Salcedo, testify that the following ELL identification procedures and activities are adhered to and staff are trained on the following: 1. The ELL Identification Process is completed for each student within 10 school days of enrollment (20 school days for students entering with IEPs). Enrollment status of each newly admitted student is determined a. If student has been in NYS public schools within past 2 years, our school contacts previous school to obtain ELL status relevant assessment scores, and proficiency level. The home language of the student is determined by a trained and licensed pedagogue. a. The parent completes the Home Language Identification Survey in the parent’s preferred language; translation services are provided by a bilingual staff member, the DOE’s over-the-phone translation services, or an alternative, high quality translation service. Eligibility for the NYSITELL is determined. a. If the newly enrolled student is entering with an IEP, the school’s Language Proficiency Team (LPT) recommends eligibility to the principal, who obtains final approval from the superintendent. Student is administered the NYSITELL, if eligible. Parent notification letters are sent to the parent in the parent’s preferred language. a. Parent is notified of their child’s ELL status. If the student is identified as an ELL and the student’s home language is Spanish, the student is administered the Spanish LAB. Student with interrupted/inconsistent formal education (SIFE) status is determined using New York State’s resources available on NYSED’s website: http://www.nysed.gov/bilingual-ed/schools/students-interruptedinconsistent-formal-education-sife. If student is an ELL, parent is invited to the parent orientation meeting. a. Parent orientation meeting provides parents with an explanation of each ELL program models offered in NYC; the parent video describing the three programs is presented (in parent’s preferred language); parents are encouraged to ask questions so that they are informed about all ELL programs; translation and interpretation services are provided throughout the meeting. 10. ELL is placed in the ELL program that the parent selected. a. b. If the ELL program that the parent selected is not available, the parent is offered a transfer to a school with that program in accordance with DOE transfer policies. If the ELL remains in the school, the ELL is placed in English as a new language and our school keeps track of parent choice so that when minimum thresholds are met, we can open the ELL program of choice. 11. Parents are notified that they have 45 days to appeal the ELL status of their child (ELL Reidentification Process). 12. If the ELL Reidentification Process is implemented for any student, the principal reviews the decision of any student whose ELL status was changed because of the ELL Reidentification Process within 6 to 12 months. 6  Part VI: LAP Assurances School Name: Westchester Square Academy School DBN: 08X558 Signatures of LAP team members certify that the information provided is accurate. Names listed in Part A, should align with this section. Name (PRINT) Title Principal Assistant Principal Parent Coordinator ENL/Bilingual Teacher Parent Teacher/Subject Area Teacher/Subject Area Coach Coach School Counselor Superintendent Field Support Center Staff Member Other Other Other Signature Date (mm/dd/yy) 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 1/1/01 7  2018-2019 LANGUAGE TRANSLATION AND INTERPRETATION PLAN FOR PARENTS Requirement under Chancellor’s Regulations A663 for all schools DBN: 08x558 School Name: Westchester Square Academy Superintendent: Staple The principal has designated the following staff member as the primary Language Access Coordinator (LAC) in Galaxy. If there is more than one LAC, list all. First Name Last Name Title Has the LAC attended a 2018-19 training The LAC was involved in the development of this conducted by the Field plan? Yes/No Language Access Coordinator? Yes/No Kristen Bielka Schaefer Payano Assistant Principal Principal Secretary No Yes Yes Yes * The Field Language Access Coordinator and Translations & Interpretation Unit will communicate with the LACs on translation, interpretation, compliance and budget. School Goal: To ensure that parents whose preferred language is other than English are provided with meaningful opportunities to participate in and have access to programs and services critical to their child’s education (Chancellor's Regulation A-663). By developing each of the following components, your school will have a comprehensive plan to provide translation and interpretation services for all parents that cannot communicate in English (not just parents of ELL students). Part A: Identification and Assessment of Parents that Cannot Communicate in English 1. Describe the data and methodologies used to assess language preferences of the parent community for both written and oral communication. Include pertinent information culled from:  Part III of the Home Language Identification Survey (HLIS)  Automate The System (ATS) reports  Student Emergency Contact cards  Surveys conducted by your school. Upon registration, families are required to complete an Emergency Contact card (Blue Card) for the student being registered. The Blue Cards have a section to list the parent’s preferred language. Any student who enters WSA for the first time from another country is interviewed by the ESL teacher. During the interview the family identifies their preferred language and is then provided with a home language survey, program information and description of native language. If their preferred language is not English we will ask if they have their own interpreters. Otherwise, parents are provided with in-house staff that share the parent’s home language or with over-the- phone interpretation services. We make families aware that DOE Interpreters are also available if needed. All of our ELL students are programmed for ELL classes in accordance with state guidelines and the NYSESLAT results. 8  2. List parents’ preferred languages for both written and oral communication. List ALL languages, including English, which are represented in your school community. This information can be found in the Parent’s Preferred Language Report (RCPL) ATS report. Language Written Preferred Percent Written Oral Preferred Percent Oral Albanian Arabic Bengali (Bangla in Bangladesh) Chinese Any French Gujarati Greek Italian Nahuatl English Spanish Soninke Twi Urdu 10 12 16 1 4 2 6 0 1 759 211 1 1 4 .97 1.17 1.56 0.1 .39 .19 .58 0 .1 73.83 20.53 0.09 0.1 0.39 9 11 16 1 4 2 6 1 1 758 212 1 2 3 .88 1.07 1.56 .1 .39 .19 .58 0.1 .1 73.81 20.64 0.09 0.19 0.29 3. From the list of parents’ preferred languages provided in the previous question, list any languages that represent at least a 10% population (minimum 20 families) of your school or more (excluding Arabic, Bengali, Chinese, English, French, Haitian Creole, Korean, Russian, Spanish and Urdu). If this is not applicable to your school please write N/A. Not Applicable Part B: Communications Calendar & Language Services 1. List the documents your school typically disseminates every year that require translation, roughly when they will be distributed to families, and plans to translate the documents. Document Name Month/Frequency Distributed to Families PA Newsletters Monthly After School Activities Quarterly How do you plan to translate? Include procedures to ensure timely provision of translated documents to parents. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE 9  School Calendar September January Student Report Cards Quarterly School Leadership Team Monthly Testing Information Including Regents/PSAT/SAT January March June August Extra Curricular Activities Quarterly Parent Teacher Conferences Quarterly vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. Translated to Spanish by in-house staff. DOE Translators and DOE vendors are used to translate documents in other languages. 2. List the formal face-to-face meetings your school will typically have with parents throughout the school year, such as parent-teacher conferences or curriculum nights, when they will occur, and plans to provide interpretation at those meetings. Meeting Name Month/Frequency of Meetings How does your school plan to provide Face to Face Meetings When necessary Disciplinary Conferences When necessary Parent Teacher Conferences September November interpretation service(s)? In house staff and over the phone interpreter services (conference calls). And if needed, we will outsource interpreters through a DOE vendor. In house staff and over the phone interpreter services (conference calls). And if needed, we will outsource interpreters through a DOE vendor. In house staff and over the phone interpreter services (conference calls). And if needed, we will outsource interpreters through a DOE vendor. 0  March May PTA Meetings Monthly In house staff and over the phone interpreter services (conference calls). And if needed, we will outsource interpreters through a DOE vendor. 3. Describe your school’s communication strategy to reach families that cannot communicate in English in the event of a school emergency. In the event of an emergency WSA will send out a phone blast with the message translated in English and Spanish - using our in house staff. In addition, we will reach out to families whose preferred language is other than English and Spanish using the DOE Over-the-Phone interpretation services. The main office, guidance, dean and counseling offices will have the phone number to the DOE Over-the-Phone interpreters saved on speed dial. Following the emergency, we will backpack literature translated to parent's preferred languages using available DOE vendors. Part C: Training Staff on Policies and Procedure Describe how your school will ensure that all staff members are aware of the goal of Chancellor’s Regulation A-663 and what resources are available to meet compliance. WSA will conduct an all staff Professional Development on Language Access Services to identify the available resources to facilitate the line of communication with non - English speaking families. Part D: Providing Notice of Language Assistance Services Describe how your school will make parents that cannot communicate in English aware of their right to receive information. Include any:  Translated signage  Brochures/flyers/letters shared with parents  Any parent engagement events where this is expressed (i.e. PTA meetings, international parent’s night, etc..) At the beginning of every year we review our Parent’s Preferred Language to identify the languages in our school and translate signage. We have welcome posters and language translation signs on display. All correspondence is done in English and Spanish. We have translation services available for all meetings and conferences. School websites are also in other languages and several office staff members are bilingual. Over-the-phone interpretation services are used for non-English speaking families. Part E: Monitoring Provision of Language Services Describe mechanisms your school will use to gather feedback from parents that cannot communicate in English on the language services they receive. How has your school implemented the feedback to improve language services? 1  Most information will be gathered by the initial intake but if more information is needed we will distribute Parent Survey and PTA monthly newsletters and meetings. Language Access Parent Survey is conducted at the end of the year to get feedback on communication with non-English speaking families. 2 
